*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 67526 ***

LETTERS ON THE MORAL AND RELIGIOUS STATE OF SOUTH AMERICA.

DENNETT, PRINTER, LEATHER LANE, LONDON.




                                 LETTERS
                                 ON THE
                        MORAL AND RELIGIOUS STATE
                                   OF
                             SOUTH AMERICA,
                                 WRITTEN
                DURING A RESIDENCE OF NEARLY SEVEN YEARS
                                   IN
                       BUENOS AIRES, CHILE, PERU,
                              AND COLOMBIA.

                            BY JAMES THOMSON.

                       PUBLISHED BY JAMES NISBET,
                       21, BERNERS STREET, LONDON.
       Hatchard and Son, Piccadilly; Seeley and Son, Fleet Street;
        Hamilton, Adams, and Co., and J. Duncan, Paternoster Row;
     W. Oliphant; Waugh and Innes; and W. Whyte and Co., Edinburgh;
               M. Ogle; and Chalmers and Collins, Glasgow;
                R. M. Tims; and W. Curry and Co., Dublin.

                              M DCCC XXVII.




TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD CALTHORPE, _&c. &c. &c._


MY LORD,

Knowing the warm, solicitude which your Lordship feels in regard to all
endeavours, to promote the moral and religious welfare of the inhabitants
of South America, I dedicate these Letters to your Lordship; and I beg of
you to accept my sincere thanks for your Lordship’s kind permission thus
to give your name to the world, in connexion with the best and highest
interests of South America.

    I have the honour to be,

                           MY LORD,

                                 Your Lordship’s

                                        Most obedient Servant,

                                                           JAMES THOMSON.




PREFACE.


Soon after my return to England in 1825, I was solicited by several
friends to publish extracts from the letters I had written during my
residence in South America. To enable me to do this, I was kindly
furnished with these letters by the individuals to whom they were
addressed. I have at length attended to these solicitations, with this
view of creating a greater interest in this country on behalf of that
quarter of the world, and in the expectation that this increased interest
will turn out to the good of South America.

I have to beg the indulgence of my readers in regard to these letters,
from the consideration that they were not written for publication. There
will appear also some indistinctness, on account of the letters being
addressed to various individuals, whilst they are here classed simply
in the order of time in which they were written. To which may be added,
among their defects, the abruptness arising from the circumstance of what
is here given being only extracts. If, however, some interest should be
excited in regard to South America by the publication of these letters,
and if there should arise from this some good to that country, I shall
not be sorry for thus having given them to the public, notwithstanding
the disadvantages under which they appear.

I am now about to return to that quarter of the world, and trust that
the same gracious hand which protected me and guided me in my former
wanderings there, will still conduct me, and will enable me to sow seed
which may spring up unto eternal life. Ten days after this date, I embark
for Mexico, as the agent of the British and Foreign Bible Society. I go
fraught with a sacred treasure, with some thousands of copies of the
Holy Scriptures. Besides circulating these, which are nearly all in
the Spanish language, I am commissioned to procure translations of the
Scriptures into the native languages of that country, and which are still
spoken there by some millions of the inhabitants.

In prosecuting these objects, I intend to travel over the greater part
of Mexico and Guatemala. Whilst traversing these parts, I shall probably
keep a journal of occurrences, illustrative of the state of the country
in a general point of view; and should the small volume now published be
favourably received, I may perhaps at some future period have something
for the press less unworthy of public attention.

LONDON, 13th February, 1827.




LETTERS ON THE MORAL AND RELIGIOUS STATE OF SOUTH AMERICA.


                                          _Buenos Aires, 5th June, 1820._

I cannot be very particular as to all that has occurred to me since my
arrival here, the outlines will be sufficient. I arrived on the 6th
October, 1818, after a voyage from Liverpool of twelve weeks and three
days, and except about a fortnight, was sick all the time. Soon after my
arrival, I made proposals to the Government, regarding the introduction
of the Lancasterian System of education. I received promises of meeting
with every encouragement in this matter, but these promises, through
neglect, were long in producing the desired effect. I was feeling the
truth of Solomon’s remark, “Hope deferred maketh the heart sad.” Under
these circumstances I was proposing to go into the interior, where I
had more positive encouragement held out to me. Just at this time, by
application at a better quarter than we had at first applied to, the
arrangement was formed by which I was engaged by the magistrates to put
their schools, in this city and neighbourhood, upon this plan. Since
that time we have been doing more or less in this business, but things
in general go on very slowly here, and besides, many political changes
have retarded our operations. Notwithstanding, however, I trust the
foundation of a good work has been laid, by pursuing of which, I hope
to see many thousands reaping the benefits of education, and imbibing
the soundest principles of religion and morality from lessons selected
from the Holy Scriptures. You will be surprised and pleased when I tell
you, these lessons are entirely of my own selection, and printed in this
place. In no case, regarding them, has there been any interference or
hindrance on the part of the clergy or others. We have now a school going
on, with upwards of 100 boys in it, and soon we expect to have others
set a going. These things, my dear friend, fill me (as they will do you)
with gratitude and thanksgiving. They are small things, in themselves
considered, but taking into consideration all the circumstances of
this country, they are great, and more especially when considered as a
foundation for future operations. In another respect also something has
been done, I mean regarding the circulation of the Scriptures. I have got
upwards of 400 Spanish New Testaments from the British and Foreign Bible
Society, and these I have been able to land here without the smallest
hindrance. Several of them have been already distributed, and have met
with a ready reception. I have been able also to send some of them into
various parts of the country here, and into Chile. Where the word of God
circulates, we have every ground to look for good effects, though it may,
like seed sown in the earth, appear for a while to be lost. By and by,
however, the seed springs up, first the blade, then the ear, and lastly
the full corn in the ear. So shall it be with the seed of the word of
God, which shall not return void, but shall accomplish the will of God in
turning men from darkness to light.

We are in the midst of political commotions here at present, and have
been so for some time past. The Lord, however, is the security of his
people, he is the Governor among the nations, and all these changes will,
I trust, lead to the promoting of his kingdom. Let us join in the prayer,
“Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth, as it is done in heaven.”
For the present, farewell.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                         _Buenos Aires, 26th July, 1820._

I have got the information contained in your letters, and the printed
sheet translated into Spanish, and have presented it to the Magistrates,
who have ordered it to be printed in the Buenos Aires Gazette.

I am happy to say the same favourable disposition towards our objects,
continues to prevail in this place; and that from Monte Video I have
lately received encouraging accounts, which, I hope, will lead to a
commencement in that place. I went there about three months ago, to see
what could be done. It so happened that General Lecor, the Portuguese
Governor, to whom I had letters of introduction, was absent at Maldonado,
with the two principal Magistrates. I explained my objects to the chief
clergyman, a liberal man, and a particular friend of the Governor’s. He
promised to do all he could towards promoting our system of education on
the Governor’s return; and I some weeks ago received from him a copy of a
letter, which the Magistrates addressed to him upon the subject, and of
which I subjoin a translation.

                                    “_Monte Video, 20th May, 1820._

    “Sir,—We have read with peculiar pleasure and attention the
    memorial which you had the goodness to send us, relative to
    the system of instruction established in Europe by Lancaster.
    We have the honour of communicating, that it has met with our
    particular esteem; and that in consequence, we have resolved to
    adopt the said system in this city, as soon as Mr. Thomson can
    come here from Buenos Aires, to commence it. Please communicate
    this to him, and express our sincere thanks to him for his
    zeal towards the youth of this province. May God preserve you
    many years.”

       *       *       *       *       *

                                          _Buenos Aires, 24th May, 1821._

I am now about to leave this city, and to proceed to Chile. I leave the
two principal schools going on as I mentioned in my last, and the masters
of the others instructed in the monitorian system. What principally
enables me to leave the schools here in the confidence that they will go
on well, is, that they are under the particular care of one who feels
much interest in the new system of instruction, and of general education.
This individual is very active, and well fitted to carry into execution
what he conceives useful. The person I am speaking of is a priest. We
have been associated together in the care of the schools for some time,
and have had much intercourse with each other, and we have always been on
the most friendly terms.

It was my intention to leave this, at the latest, in October next.
Things, however, being favourably arranged, as above mentioned, I have
thought it my duty to set out for Chile without loss of time. From my
former letters you would learn that the Chilian government has requested
me to go there to establish schools on the Lancasterian plan. I had
promised to go as soon as the state of the schools here would permit. The
Chilian government, through their minister here, continues to shew the
same interest as before in regard to this matter, and has now made an
agreement with me.

The season is now far advanced, and the Andes are covered with snow.
Besides this inconvenience of the mountains, the roads, in some places,
are nearly intercepted, so as to render travelling rather insecure. From
these considerations, I have resolved, with the advice of my friends,
to go by sea, and have taken my passage in the brig Dragon, Captain
Green, for Valparaiso, in Chile. Sailing round Cape Horn is by no means
so formidable a matter now as it was formerly considered to be. Vessels
frequently go round now, and at all seasons. This is now the middle
of our winter, and we expect the cold to be severe. I am accordingly
preparing myself for it, as well as I can, by providing warm clothing.
During the winter the winds are considered more favourable, and vessels
make quicker passages. We expect to sail in a day or two, and, I trust,
He who guided me over the ocean in coming to this place, will still be
with me to preserve me, and to bring me safely to my desired haven.

I leave all my friends here on the best terms, and I leave the place,
in many respects with regret. I shall never forget all the kindness I
have met with in this city from the Magistrates, and from all classes
with whom I have had intercourse. May God reward them. When I gave in my
resignation, I said that it was my intention to return here next summer,
to visit the schools, and to see how they were coming on. In the kindest
manner I was requested not to forget my promise of returning. They were
sorry, they said, that it was not in their power to reward me in a
pecuniary way, from the lowness of their funds. They begged me to accept
of their sincerest thanks for establishing this system of education in
the country, from which they said they anticipated the happiest results,
in making education general throughout all classes of the people; and
they added that, as a mark of respect, they had requested the government
to confer on me the honour of citizenship, and which was accordingly done.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                      _Santiago de Chile, 6th Aug. 1821._

My letter to you of the 16th July, brought down my journal to the day
before my leaving Valparaiso. On the 17th I left that place in the
afternoon, and at two o’clock on the 19th I said, “Peace be to this
city!” I was going to give you some account of the road, and what I met
with upon it, but find I have got other things to write which will fill
my letter. I shall leave this description till a further opportunity.

You know, already, that I was engaged to come here by this government,
and that my passage round the Cape was paid by the same. I therefore
looked for a fair and open reception. I have not been disappointed, or,
perhaps, I should rather say I have, for I have met with a reception
beyond my expectation, I might say to my wish. I have been introduced to
the Director and to the Ministers of Government, all of whom express much
desire for the speedy establishment of schools _throughout_ Chile. We
have got the largest apartment in the University for a school-room. The
joiners are busy at work, fitting it up, and we only wait their finishing
to begin our operations.

I shall occupy the rest of my letter in giving you a translation of two
articles, which bear upon this subject.

On my arrival here, I received a copy of the following order, issued by
the Government two days before I reached this city:—

    “By supreme authority of this date, I communicate to Don Manuel
    Salas the following note.

    “Mr. Thomson, who has been engaged to establish in this city
    the new system of mutual instruction, has already arrived in
    Valparaiso. His Excellency, the Director, has a decided wish
    that public education may be general, and is very anxious to
    give all possible aid to this establishment for elementary
    instruction, as preparatory to the higher branches. He has for
    this end appointed you with full powers to forward this object,
    in conjunction with Mr. Thomson, and the President of the
    Board of Public Education. You will, therefore, do all in your
    power to establish it as soon and as perfectly as possible.—A
    copy of this order to be sent to the President of Public
    Education, and to Mr. Thomson.”

              “Office of the Minister of State in Santiago
                       de Chile, 17th July, 1821.

                        “JOAQUIN DE ECHEVARRIA.”

Upon enquiring who this Don Manuel Salas was, I found he was a man very
highly respected by every one, and a modest but decided philanthropist.
I have since been frequently with him, and find him, indeed, as
described to me. I next give you an article from the Public Gazette of
the 4th current; I think it is from the pen of Salas, but this is only
conjecture. It is, however, either from him or from one of the Ministers
of Government.

    “PUBLIC EDUCATION.

    “Ignorance is one of the greatest evils that man can suffer,
    and it is the principal cause of all his errors and miseries.
    It is also the grand support of tyranny, and ought, therefore,
    to be banished by every means from that country which desires
    a liberty regulated by laws, customs, and opinion. None can be
    happy unless he study religion, morality, and his own rights,
    unless he improve by the knowledge of those who have preceded
    him, and enter into social connexion, as it were, with those
    who in former times, and in other places, cultivated the
    sciences and the arts, and who have deposited in their writing,
    the fruit of their studies for the improvement of others. The
    only way by which we can form such an acquaintance with great
    men is _by reading_. The happy day is now arrived when the
    infinitely valuable art of reading is to be extended to every
    individual in Chile. We have now the pleasure of announcing
    this to all classes of the community. This will be considered
    as the most interesting news, by those who know its importance,
    and who consider it as the basis of solid prosperity. Deeply
    impressed with this truth, our benevolent government has
    brought to this place Mr. James Thomson, who has established in
    Buenos Aires elementary schools upon that admirable system of
    Lancaster, which has spread through the world. He is going to
    establish schools on the same plan in this city, from which,
    as a centre, this system will be propagated through all the
    towns of the state. The readiness with which this mode of
    education has been generally adopted, its economy, and the
    quickness and order with which children learn by it reading,
    writing, arithmetic, and the principles of grammar, strongly
    recommend it. It has been particularly useful in those places
    where rural or mechanical occupations allow but a short time
    for instruction. There is, therefore, now no obstacle in
    the way for every one in Chile to obtain education. Notice
    will be given, from time to time, of the progress of the
    central school, which is to serve as a model for others. In
    it masters will be instructed, and those masters who show the
    most attention in acquiring a knowledge of this system will be
    appointed in preference to the other schools.”

       *       *       *       *       *

                                  _Santiago de Chile, 8th October, 1821._

I seize the opportunity of sending you a few lines by his Majesty’s ship
Owen Glendower, which sails for England from Valparaiso immediately.
I enclose you a copy of a letter of this date to Mr. Owen, which will
inform you of my concerns here, touching the Bible Society, to this
date. In addition to this, I shall now communicate to you some notices
regarding our schools here, bringing down my accounts upon the subject
from the 1st September (the date of my last letter to Mr. S.) to the
present day.

I am happy to say, the favourable reception I met with here, and of
which I wrote you on the 6th August, was not a momentary feeling. It has
been kept up till now, and I might also say, it has rather increased
than diminished. Soon after my arrival in this city, a large room in the
University was pointed out to me as the place in which we were to begin
our school operations. This hall is capable of containing 200 children,
according to our plan, and this is a very good number for a model school.
This hall was to have been the University Chapel. The building I here
call the University, is not occupied at present in the way its name would
indicate, though intended for a place of learning. There is, however,
another building appropriated to the objects of a college, and of which I
may write you afterwards. My present object is to speak of our schools.
Through the delay of the joiners in fitting up this place, it was not
completed till the 17th September. On that day our school was opened.
From day to day our number increased, till, at the end of a fortnight,
our number (200) was completed. Since that time, we have been daily
importuned to admit others, which we are unable to do. We are, however,
about to commence fitting up another large hall in the University
buildings. At the present rate of applications, we shall certainly have
more in readiness for that second school, by the time it is prepared,
than it will contain. The fitting up of others is also talked of. From
the short time our school has been going on, it promises to do well. The
children are docile and agreeable. I am now so much familiarized with
the appearance and manner of the children in these countries, that I
feel myself quite at home among them. There is more resemblance to the
English or European face among the children and others here, in Chile,
than in Buenos Aires. I have been _this moment_ interrupted by one of my
scholars, who has called upon me, and brought me a ham, a present from
his mother.

All classes seem to take an interest in our schools. We are daily
visited. The First Minister of the Government pays us a visit regularly
every afternoon. We have already four masters studying the system, and
these will be ready in a month or two to open schools on our plan, either
in this city or in the provincial towns. In Conception, Coquimbo, and
another town of inferior population, they are preparing for establishing
schools upon our system. The principal things we stand in need of for
the rapid extension of our schools, are slates and printed lessons. I am
expecting 2000 slates by the first vessel from England, and am at present
getting some lessons printed in the government printing office. To defray
the expense of these, we have opened a subscription, which I hope will do
well. I have already got upwards of 270 dollars among my English friends
here, and expect more.

Thus, you see, the Lord is with us, and blessed be his name. May he,
in his own way and wisdom, make his great name glorious in the eyes of
Chile, and of all South America.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                  _Santiago de Chile, 8th October, 1821._

I wrote you a few lines on the 26th February, and then mentioned that
it was my intention to visit Chile. Through the gracious providence of
the God of the Bible Society, I have now effected my intention. I left
Buenos Aires on the 30th May, and sailing round Cape Horn, arrived safely
at Valparaiso, after a voyage of forty-four days. After a short stay in
that place, to recruit my health, which always suffers at sea, I came
to this city, the capital of Chile. Here, the moment of my arrival, I
met with a very encouraging reception. You know, of course, that my most
prominent object in South America is the promoting of education on the
Lancasterian plan. On this footing it was that I experienced so hearty
a reception in this place. Great and respected as your Society is, and
ought to be, in the eyes of England and of Europe, it would yet be an
imprudence to proclaim one’s self your agent here, with the sole or chief
object of circulating the Bible. This is not speaking very favourably of
the inhabitants of South America, you will say. I confess it, but at the
same time, I have told you the truth.[1] Whilst, however, I hold myself
forward in the eyes of South America, as a promoter of education and an
instructor of youth, I consider myself in all respects as the servant
of the British and Foreign Bible Society. I beg you to consider me in
this light, and to call upon me with the utmost freedom in whatever way
I can, directly or indirectly, promote your blessed work, in making the
inhabitants of this vast continent acquainted with the words of eternal
life. I have said, my prominent object here is the establishment of
schools. I freely and openly profess this, and in consequence am every
where hailed as a friend. The little influence I have thus acquired, and
the confidence reposed in me, enable me more effectually to promote the
circulation of the Scriptures, than if I acted ostensibly and exclusively
as your agent. One proof of this I shall give you. I brought with me
among my books from Buenos Aires, about sixty Spanish New Testaments. In
getting my luggage through the custom-house, I was told, that the books
must be inspected by the Bishop. I wished this might be dispensed with,
but it was insisted on. I then told the officers, that I was engaged to
come here by the Government to establish the Lancasterian schools. That
alters the case, said they, and immediately the papers for despatching
my books, &c. were signed, and not a single book was so much as looked
at either by the Bishop, or by any of the custom-house officers. I was
told, before coming here, that there was much less liberality in Chile,
as to the circulation of the Scriptures, than in Buenos Aires. I was,
therefore, anxious to avoid the inspection of the Bishop above noticed. I
understand he has it in his power to prohibit what books he chooses, and
that his prohibition holds, unless the Government give, in the individual
case, an order to the contrary. I am in expectation of receiving from
you very soon 300 of Scio’s translation of the New Testament. These I
shall let pass all the forms required, to make proof whether or not
the Scriptures are allowed to be introduced into Chile. This, you will
perceive, is an object worth ascertaining, and the knowledge of it will
be of considerable use in directing us in future. Should the Bishop demur
as to their circulation, and wish to keep them, I can, I think, obtain an
order of the Government to prevent it; so that we may consider there is
no great danger of losing them, in making the trial referred to.

Notwithstanding what I have said above, no interruption to the
circulation of the Spanish New Testament has yet been experienced. Soon
after my arrival, I gave to an Englishman, who has a shop here, some
copies to sell. This man is a Roman Catholic, and I am happy to say, he
recommends the Scriptures to the natives of this country, who are of his
own religion. He has already sold about twenty. He is very anxious for
the arrival of the Spanish Bibles, which I told him I expected, as he
thinks he could sell many of them.

In my letters to you, from time to time, when in Buenos Aires, I related
to you the state of the circulation of the Scriptures in that place. I
am happy to say, that at my leaving it, the prospects regarding this
important matter were more favourable than at any former period. I do
not mean to say by this, that there was any particular stir about the
word of God, or great demand for it; but I mean to convey to you this
encouraging truth, that the Scriptures are occasionally bought, and
more so than formerly, and that they are increasingly read from year to
year. I consider the word of God to have fairly got an entrance into
Buenos Aires; and that its prohibition, or any material hindrance to its
circulation, is not only unlikely, but, one might say, impossible. I give
you this as my opinion, after a residence in that place of more than two
years and a half, and an intercourse with various classes of society
during that time.

I shall now mention some things not formerly noticed, regarding the
circulation of the Scriptures in Buenos Aires, and in the surrounding
country.—A military officer, commanding on a station a short distance
from the city, has been greatly delighted with the New Testament, and
in consequence, very anxious to make others acquainted with it. He
recommended the reading of it to several poor people who were unable
to purchase it, and requested to have copies to give them, which he
obtained. In this way he has distributed a number of copies. Besides
those given to the poor, some have been sold by him to those able to pay
for them. He used to take me very cordially by the hand when we met,
and to speak with pleasure on the beneficence of the Bible Society, and
of the great advantages that would arise to his countrymen by a general
reading of the Holy Scriptures. I told him I hoped soon to have the
whole Bible in Spanish, and in consequence he is all expectation for
it. On my leaving Buenos Aires, I gave twenty-four New Testaments to
this gentleman, in the confidence of their being distributed in the most
judicious manner.

There is a military station and a small town on the east coast of
Patagonia, called Rio Negro, in about 42° south latitude. To this place
some copies of the New Testament have been sent. One individual, a native
of that place, was so pleased with the copy he got, that he requested
the person who brought it, to bring several copies on his return for
his family and friends. I am personally acquainted with the officer at
present commanding at that place, and am pretty certain he will not
throw any obstacle in the way of the circulation of the Scriptures.
This gentleman attended our school in Buenos Aires, and took with him
lessons, &c. to establish schools on his arrival in that place, for which
he sailed in May last. The lessons I have referred to I got printed in
Buenos Aires for our schools. They are selections from the Scriptures.
These lessons, now used in most of the schools, will greatly contribute,
I hope, to create a desire to possess the sacred volume, a book which has
hitherto been little known in this country.

A Patagonian chief, called Cualli Piachepolon, in the very centre of
Patagonia, is in possession of one of your Testaments. This man has
been in the habit of visiting Buenos Aires for some years, in order to
exchange the few commodities which his country at present produces, for
those of Europe. He has hence acquired some knowledge of the Spanish
language. Upon hearing some passages of the New Testament read to him, he
requested to have the book, that he might, on his return, explain it to
his people.

Some copies have been sent to Tucuman, to Salta, &c.; so that your
bounty is known, more or less throughout the provinces of the Rio de
la Plata; and I have no doubt but, some hundred years hence, the then
populous banks of that king of rivers, and the circumjacent country, will
gratefully remember the present Committee and Members of the British and
Foreign Bible Society.

I close my account of Buenos Aires, for the present, by noticing, that
some individuals, upon obtaining the New Testament, and hearing of
your great and extended efforts in distributing the Holy Scriptures,
wondered how they had been taught that the English were not Christians.
When speaking on religion, it is common to use the word Christian and
Protestant in contradistinction to each other, meaning, by the former,
themselves or Roman Catholics in general, and by the latter, the English
or Protestants in general.

A short time before I left the Rio de la Plata, I sent ten of the
Portuguese Bibles, and twenty New Testaments, to Bahia, in charge of a
person who, I think, would take care to see them safely lodged in that
place. I sent them to the care of the English Chaplain there.

During the few days I stopped at Valparaiso, I met with a gentleman to
whom I had formerly intrusted twelve of the Spanish New Testaments. Upon
my enquiring about them, he told me they had been stolen out of his room.
Though this was to be regretted, yet one good effect would arise from it,
in as much as the person who stole them would no doubt take effectual
care to put them in circulation.

In my letter of 26th February, I requested the Society to send me 200
of Scio’s translation to Buenos Aires, and 300 to Valparaiso. I hope
these will respectively arrive in due time. I then noticed to you the
advantage that would arise from lettering them on the back, and varying
them in the binding. I particularly request your attention to this, as
I am sure it will contribute greatly to their sale. Let the binding be
in many cases elegant. They would thus be more expensive to the Society
at first, but they would be considerably less in the end. It is my
intention to _sell_ them in future, except when a favourable opportunity
occurs of giving the word of God to a person in real poverty. This I know
to be the uniform recommendation of the Society. I would beg leave to
suggest to you, that no Bibles or New Testaments be sent out in future
to Buenos Aires by the captains of ships. The captains, however well
intentioned they may be, cannot stay to distribute them. The Testaments,
in consequence, have not unfrequently come into hands who wish to get rid
of them in any way. By this means they become, as it were, of too little
consideration, and their _sale_ is thus also prevented, which no doubt
is the most effectual way of distributing them. In Buenos Aires several
persons objected to buying them, because they had formerly been got for
nothing. I shall, as I have said above, most readily act as your agent
in distributing the Scriptures in Buenos Aires, and in Chile. The most
judicious and effectual way of doing this is through the booksellers in
these places. Before leaving Buenos Aires I arranged for the continued
circulation of the New Testament, and here I shall make arrangements
to the same effect before I go. It is my intention to visit Peru before
long; and I shall there also, and indeed wherever I may be, zealously
endeavour to promote the good work in which you are engaged.

In a few years South America will have large claims on your Society, but
she will pay you from her mines for all your kindness. Should the Lord
spare me ten or twenty years, I have no doubt I shall see wonderful and
blessed changes on this continent. It is my intention, through the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to spend my life (long or short as it may be)
in South America; probably not in any fixed place, but residing from time
to time wherever I may most effectually promote the work of the Lord, in
establishing schools, in circulating the Scriptures, and in the use of
such other means as circumstances may direct.

[1] Some letters towards the end will show, that this was too
unfavourable a conclusion, but it was the opinion I entertained from what
I had then seen of the country.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                      _Santiago de Chile, 1st Dec. 1821._

Before this reaches you, the taking of Lima by San Martin, will be known
in England. I need not expatiate upon this subject to you. You must see
at once how much our field is thereby extended. I may truly say, the fall
of Lima is as great a blow to the kingdom of Satan here, as it is to the
cause of Spain in South America. From what I have learned of San Martin,
I am sure he will prove a great forwarder of our cause there, and indeed
wherever he may be. The rejoicings here on account of the fall of Lima
have been very great, and they still continue. The fall of that strong
hold of the Spaniards, is at once the liberty of Peru, and the stability
of Chile; and I may add too, the independence of South America.

We are about to form a School Society in this city, which I hope will be
attended with happy results. The Director condescends to be the Patron of
the Society, and his first minister is to be President. We are looking
around us for the most patriotic and liberal men of the city to form a
Committee. Our Society may not be able to do what a similar Society would
do in England; but it may, however, do something, and may considerably
forward our objects here on behalf of the inhabitants of Chile. Besides
the establishing and superintending of schools throughout the state,
there is another object to which the Society will greatly contribute,
I mean, the printing of some elementary works for the schools, and for
the children to read in their own houses. This is a part of our work,
which I consider of great importance, and to which I intend to turn a
considerable part of my time and attention, so soon as other matters will
allow.

I believe I wrote you, before leaving Buenos Aires, that I had sent a
Master to Monte Video, or that I was about to send one. He had not left
Buenos Aires when I came away, as he was occupied in printing a grammar,
which he had written for the use of our schools. I have lately received
a letter from him, of which I shall give you an extract.—“On the 4th of
this month (July) I arrived in this city with the slates and lessons you
gave me for the schools here. On the following day, I presented myself to
Larañaga, (the chief ecclesiastic in Monte Video,) and he introduced me
to General Lecor, the Governor, to whom I gave your letter. I met with a
very hearty reception from the general, as also from Larañaga, and the
magistrates. On the 9th, we had assigned to us for a school-room, a large
hall in the Fort. This hall will hold 200 children. The general sent the
joiners and masons of the Government to prepare this school, and I am in
hopes we shall be able to open it in three weeks. I am making endeavours
to form a School Society here, which may take under its management
the schools of this city and province. I am in great expectation of
succeeding in this object, as the members of the Government are very well
disposed to it.”

In the end of this month, I am thinking of crossing the Andes, to verify
my long intended visit to Mendoza. The printing of our lessons is nearly
finished, and I shall thus be enabled to take some with me for the
supply of that place. You will see by the extracts of letters I gave from
Mendoza, in my last letter to Mr. H. (Nov. 1st), that things there are
very promising. I hope my expectations regarding their improvements will
be more than realized. The snow still continues on the mountains, as I
am informed by a gentleman just come over them. I hope it will be nearly
all gone by the time I set out. It has continued, I understand, for an
unusual length of time this season.

I shall leave the schools in my absence, under the care of an Englishman
lately come here from London. This gentleman was engaged by the agent
there of this Government, for the purpose of establishing Lancasterian
schools here. Upon his arrival, it was the intention of the Government to
send him to Conception. I thought, however, it would be better that he
should stay here to instruct the school-masters in grammar, geography,
&c., whilst they were studying the system in our school. To this proposal
the Government cheerfully agreed. We have in consequence a separate
class in the school, in which Mr. Eaton instructs the masters, and two
or three more who choose to attend. This arrangement will prove, I hope,
highly advantageous to the education of the country at large, as those,
who in future take charge of schools, will be better qualified for this
important office.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                     _Santiago de Chile, 30th Jan. 1822._

As I know you and your good friends of the British and Foreign School
Society take a deep interest in all things here relative to education, I
send you an extract from the Chile Gazette of the 19th current, by which
you will see that our endeavours to form a School Society here have not
been in vain.

    “The surest method of promoting the happiness of any country
    is to make all the people in it well informed and industrious.
    An end has at length been put to the obstacles which prevented
    the natives of Chile from enjoying those blessings which are
    enjoyed by other nations less favoured by nature, but who have
    preceded us in the cultivation of literature and the arts. It
    is hence necessary now to strain every nerve to regain that
    time which in idleness and darkness has been thrown away. We
    begin, then, by offering an opportunity of acquiring knowledge
    to all classes of the community, without respect of rank or
    fortune, of sex or age.

    “The Lancasterian system of mutual instruction, now introduced
    in most parts of the civilized world, and to which many
    places already owe an improvement in their habits, has been
    established amongst us, and in such a manner as prognosticates
    its beneficial effects. The propagation of this system holds
    out the surest means of extirpating those principles formed
    amongst us during the time of darkness. The government has
    resolved zealously to protect this establishment, and, as
    the best way of fulfilling its intention, has resolved to
    unite with it in this object those persons who have the same
    sentiments on the subject, and who, at the same time, possess
    that activity, zeal, and energy, which this important matter
    demands. In all places this system of instruction prospers and
    extends itself under the fostering care of societies. This
    circumstance at once determines me to follow the example thus
    set before us, and immediately to establish a Society for this
    object. Of this Society I shall be the protector and a member.
    My first minister of state will be President. The Solicitor
    General of the City, the Protector of the City Schools, and
    the Rector of the National Institute, shall be _ex-officio_
    members of the Committee of Management. The other members of
    the Committee will in future be chosen by the Society; but, for
    the present, I nominate to this charge:— * * * *

    “The Committee will hold its meetings in the room belonging to
    the Central School, on such days as shall be agreed on at the
    first meeting, with no other formality than what is dictated
    by good order. The Committee shall form rules for the Society,
    and present them to the Government for approbation, and shall
    name a Secretary, Accountant, and Treasurer, either from their
    own number or otherwise. The object of this Institution is
    to extend, in every direction throughout Chile, the benefits
    of education; to promote the instruction of all classes, but
    especially of the poor; to seize all the advantages which
    this new system of education offers; and to point out those
    means by which it may be best adapted to the circumstances
    and necessities of the country. In short, this Institution
    will be considered a good of the greatest magnitude, and whose
    efficacies will, we trust, in some measure correspond to that
    great extension of which it is susceptible.

                             (Signed)

                                                       “O’HIGGINS.”

I trust this Society, which has thus been formed, will be extremely
useful in forwarding the great concerns of general education in this
rising nation. There are many circumstances here very encouraging in
regard to the future prospects and prosperity of Chile. It is probable
our Society will communicate with you before long, by way of claiming
alliance with you in the grand work of universal instruction.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                      _Santiago de Chile, 9th May, 1822._

You have heard, I dare say, that I left Buenos Aires some time ago, and
came to Chile. I have now been here ten months, and am much pleased with
this country. In as far as respects the climate, I believe no country
can be more desirable to live in than this. It rains a good deal in the
winter season, that is, from June to September inclusive. Frost and
snow are seldom or never seen in the plains; notwithstanding, a fire is
very desirable in the winter. The highest ridge of the Andes is full
in sight from this city. This is covered with snow all the year round.
When it rains here below, it uniformly snows on the mountains. In the
summer season, we have no rain at all, and very few cloudy days. The
common course of the seasons is four months of occasional rains, and
eight months of fair weather. In the summer it is pretty hot during the
day; but it is always very comfortable at night. In Buenos Aires, on
the contrary, the nights, during the summer, are generally very warm.
In another respect also, Buenos Aires differs very remarkably from this
country. There, not a mountain, nor a hill, nor a rock is to be seen;
here, all those abound. The natives of Buenos Aires, who have never
been from home, have no idea of what a mountain is like;[2] and of snow
they are equally ignorant, having never seen the one or the other. They
would also be ignorant of what a stone is, were it not that some have
been brought from the other side of the river, for paving the streets.
After what I have said of the scarcity of stones, you may judge of the
correctness of a very modern work on South America, in which it is said,
“All the houses in Buenos Aires are built of a fine white stone, found
in quarries in the neighbourhood.” There is not, in Buenos Aires, a
single house built of stone, nor is there any quarry on that side of the
river within 100 miles of Buenos Aires. The houses there are all built
of brick. The mentioning of this last, brings me back again to Chile.
All the houses here, or nearly all, are built of _unburnt_ brick, such
bricks as the Israelites made in Egypt; they are made of earth mixed with
straw. It is said, this material for building suits the country best, on
account of earthquakes, which are not unfrequent. Last night, just about
this hour, (eight o’clock) we had a smart shock. I was sitting writing,
when my attention was called by a rumbling noise, and a clattering of
the window shutters. In a few seconds, the whole house shook, and the
creaking of the beams and joists was very distinct. The noise continued
for a few seconds after the shock, when all ceased. This is now the
fourth earthquake we have had in less than a week. They prevail most, I
am told, in this month.

We have now got our schools set on foot in this place, and I am thinking
of going to Lima in the course of a month or less, in order to prosecute
my objects there. According to the best information, the new state of
things in that country goes on wonderfully. Many reforms are taking
place of a very salutary nature. Gaming, which is carried on to a very
hurtful extent in all South America, has just been prohibited in Lima, by
the Government. Acts have passed for the gradual abolition of slavery.
Since the taking of Lima, all the children of slaves are born free.
The importation of slaves is entirely prohibited, and no infringement
of the Act takes place. The same state of things subsists here and in
Buenos Aires, regarding this shameful business. There is in South America
generally, I believe, a great desire for the increase of knowledge. I
can bear witness, that this is the case, in those parts I have been
in; and I doubt not of finding it so in Lima also. I am told, that
learning has prevailed there more than in places to the south of it, on
this continent. There are several men there, I am informed, who stand
tolerably high in literature. About three months ago, a literary society
was formed in Lima. I have sent a translation of the Act incorporating
the Society to Professor Jameson, of Edinburgh, and it may perhaps appear
in the Edinburgh Philosophical Journal.

The fall of Lima decided, I think, the contest between Spain and her
colonies, fairly establishing the independence of the latter. If any
thing, however, was wanting to complete this state of things, it has now
been accomplished by the late occurrences in Mexico. The immediate and
solid advantages occurring from this independence, to the cause of our
fellow-men in this continent, are very great. Knowledge is now tolerated
in the country, and also patronized. A war of extermination has been
declared against ignorance, and is actually waged. Soon after San Martin
entered Lima, a provisional law was issued, until a new code should be
formed for the country. In this provisional law, religious toleration is
publicly acknowledged, for the first time, in South America.

A most wonderful change has taken place in Buenos Aires since I left
it. War, anarchy, and confusion, have given place to a steady, firm,
and enlightened government. The principal cause of this happy change is
the present minister of state, Rivadavia. He arrived in Buenos Aires
a short time before I left it. For some years past he has resided in
London and in Paris; and the time he has spent in these places has been
well employed. He has there studied and is now practising the soundest
principles of political economy. If Buenos Aires goes on for a few years
as it has done for some months past, it will afford excellent lessons in
this interesting science to the nations of Europe, perhaps to the country
of Adam Smith. A fine emulation will be carried on, and is already
begun, between Buenos Aires and Lima. If an improvement is proposed in
one of these places, it is deemed sufficient to silence popular and low
prejudice, to publish that such a thing has already been done in the
other. As to the Chilians, they are, generally speaking, less enlightened
and more indifferent in respect to these subjects. Our Director is a
good man, truly desirous of the progress of Chile in every thing useful.
He has, however, but little activity or zeal. It is pleasing to see,
under these circumstances, the good effects produced on us here, by the
newspapers of Lima on the one hand, and of Buenos Aires on the other.
From these many articles are copied into our public journals; and some
things are already begun among us, in imitation of our friends in the
north and on the east. I lately crossed and recrossed the Andes on a
visit to Mendoza and San Juan. The cause of knowledge and of truth goes
on there also. In each of these places there is a printing-press, and
from these are likely to issue soon, many things which will contribute to
the general good.

[2] The river La Plata, opposite Buenos Aires, is thirty miles wide, and
at times, under a very favourable state of the atmosphere, a dim outline
of the low mountains on the northern side is visible. To this extent the
Buenos Aireans know what a mountain is.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                 _Lima, 11th July, 1822._

Through the unceasing goodness of God towards me, I have now arrived
safely in this city. On the 18th of last month I sailed from Valparaiso,
and after a pleasant passage of ten days we cast anchor in Callao Bay.
Callao is an excellent harbour, the best I have yet seen. It will hold
almost any number of ships riding in great safety. It is well defended
from all winds except the north, but it scarcely ever blows from that
quarter. In consequence of an order from the Government that no
passengers should be allowed to land until they receive a licence or
passport from Lima, I had to defer my coming here till the day after our
arrival; I got permission, however, from the captain of the port to go
on shore. After viewing Callao, I went to take a view of the place where
the former Callao stood, which was destroyed by the earthquake, of which
of course you have read. Its site is about half a mile from where the
present town stands. The destruction seems to have been complete. Not a
house is now standing; but walls of houses of considerable thickness are
to be seen scattered all over the place. Some of these are lying _flat_,
and others are half turned over. How weak is man, and all his works, when
God arises to shake the earth!

On the day on which I arrived in this city, I called on San Martin,
and delivered him the letters of introduction which I had brought from
Chile. He opened one of the letters, and observing its purport, said “Mr.
Thomson! I am extremely glad to see you;” and he rose up, and gave me a
very hearty embrace. He would not, he said, be lavish in compliments,
but would assure me of his great satisfaction at my arrival; and said,
that nothing should be wanting on his part to further the object which
had brought me to Peru. Next day as I was sitting in my room, a carriage
stopped at the door, and my little boy came running in crying, San
Martin! San Martin! In a moment he entered the room, accompanied by one
of his ministers. I would have had him step into another apartment of
the house more suited to his reception; but he said the room was very
well, and sat down on the first chair he reached. We conversed about
our schools, and other similar objects for some time; and in going away
he desired me to call on him next morning, and said he would introduce
me to the Marquis of Truxillo, who is at present what is called the
Supreme Deputy or Regent. I called on him accordingly next morning, and
he took me with him and introduced me to the Marquis, and to each of the
ministers.

From all the members of the government I have received great
encouragement. On the 6th current an order was issued relative to our
schools, and published in the Lima Gazette of the same date. I am going
to write Mr. Millar to-morrow, and shall give him a translation of this
order or decree, a copy of which will of course be sent you. By this
order one of the convents is appropriated to the schools, and is now in
our possession. I believe the convents here will decrease in number as
the schools multiply. There is no contest or balancing of powers between
the civil and ecclesiastical powers in this place. The former has the
latter entirely at their nod. The case in regard to this convent is a
proof of what I have said. The order for the friars to remove was given
on Saturday, on Monday they began to remove, and on Tuesday the keys
were delivered up.

From all I have seen during the short time I have been here, I cannot
doubt of the great benefits which this country will derive from the new
state of things. San Martin and his first minister, (and also the others)
seem truly anxious to characterize the times by improvements—by solid
improvements. They wish to encourage foreigners, and to improve the state
of the country in every point of view. I have already mentioned to you my
representation made to the Chilian government just before leaving that
place, regarding the bringing out of tradesmen and farmers. I showed a
copy of this representation to San Martin; he read it very carefully
over, and concluded by saying, “Excellent!” He then told me what was his
opinion on the subject, and proposed a plan for carrying it into effect,
much more likely to succeed than the one I had stated. I am to draw up
this plan in order, and to present it to him, that it may be sanctioned
and carried into effect. I therefore consider this matter, so far as
regards Peru, as fairly begun. The particulars of the plan I may send you
afterwards. In the mean time, that you may see that in these matters I am
not losing sight of my chief object, I shall mention to you one sentence
of the representation referred to. It is this, “The men who will be most
useful to South America, are men truly religious and of sound morality.”
The minister of Chile, upon reading this sentence, said, “That is very
true;” and San Martin expressed himself in a similar manner upon my
stating the same thing to him.

What an immeasurable field is South America; and how white it is to
the harvest! I have told you this repeatedly, but I have a pleasure in
telling it to you again. I do think that, since the world began, there
never was so fine a field for the exercise of benevolence in all its
parts. The man of science, the moralist, the christian, have all fine
scope here for their talents. God, who has opened such a door, will
surely provide labourers.

My present intention is to continue here about six months, and then to
move on northwards. I may, however, be kept longer here than I intend,
but I am anxious to get to England as soon as possible. My stay here
will depend much on the facility or difficulty of obtaining good masters
for the school. This I find, from experience, a matter of so great
importance, that I intend to pay every attention to it; and I have it now
in my power more than ever to do so, having represented to the government
the necessity of encouragement, by offering employment and a good salary
to those who thoroughly study the system, and are able to put it in
practice; and this encouragement I am authorised to give.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                 _Lima, 12th July, 1822._

My last letter to you was written a few days before my leaving Chile. I
then apprized you of the state of things there at that time, and of my
intention of setting out for this place. Through the blessing of God, I
arrived safely in this country on the 28th of last month, and have now to
state to you how things look here, in reference to that truly important
object—EDUCATION.

I believe I told you, some time ago, that from various circumstances I
expected every encouragement would be given to our object here by San
Martin. I have not been disappointed in this. My expectations have all
been fulfilled, and more than fulfilled. San Martin is most _decidedly_ a
friend to general, to universal education. I hope none of the members of
the Committee of the British and Foreign School Society will be offended,
but rather gratified, when I say, that they are not more friendly to
this object than San Martin. Because I have come to Peru to promote this
object, I have received from him every mark of respect and personal
attention, as well as every encouragement to proceed in this work. The
Marquis of Truxillo, and each of the ministers of government, feel deeply
interested in the same object. Blessed be God for this encouragement. In
his hand are the hearts of all, and he inclineth them to whatsoever he
will. Surely the days draw nigh, when ignorance shall be ashamed to walk
about any where in open day. May the glorious war now waged against her
be a war of extermination. It will I trust be so, and when this enemy
of mankind shall be slain, the British and Foreign School Society shall
be clothed with her spoils, and be crowned with never fading laurel. Is
it wrong to indulge pleasing prospects of the future amelioration of
mankind? Is it sinful to cherish the hope of better times for this poor
unfortunate world? I think it is not. If it is right to pray “Thy will
be done on earth, as it is done in heaven,” it cannot be wrong to expect
that this prayer, daily reiterated from the mouth of thousands, will one
day be heard, and be answered in all its extent; and when the will of God
is done in this world, as it is done above, then shall the felicity on
earth resemble the felicity of heaven.

The following is a translation of a decree of this government relative
to the Schools, and which was published in the Lima Gazette of the 6th
current.

“Preamble.—Without education there is properly speaking no society. Men
may indeed live together without it, but they cannot know the extent of
the duties, and the rights which bind them one to another, and it is in
the right knowledge of these duties and rights that the well being of
society consists. The bringing of education to any degree of perfection,
is, from the nature of the thing, slow. To accomplish it, time is
required, and some degree of stability in the government, as well as some
other circumstances, both natural and moral. All these must combine, in
order that the education of the people may become general, and that thus
a foundation may be laid for the continuance of those Institutions which
may be established among them. Of the various improvements which the
government has been desirous of making, none has been more earnestly and
constantly kept in view since the moment of its commencement, than the
reformation of public education. In those intervals of tranquillity which
have been enjoyed from the clamour of arms, this object has occupied
their attention; and though the sun has not stood still, they have found
in activity the secret of doubling the length of the day.

“It has already been announced, in various decrees of the government,
that the introduction of the Lancasterian system in the public schools,
was one of the plans in meditation. It is not yet possible to calculate
the revolution which will be produced in the world by this system of
mutual instruction, on its becoming general throughout the civilized
world. When this shall take place, ignorance shall come to an end, or at
least shall be reduced to certain limits, beyond which it shall never be
allowed to pass. The time is now arrived for setting this system agoing
in this place, and the commencing of it is worthy of the month of July—a
month in which posterity will record many events of importance; and we
trust they will do us the justice to declare, that we have desired to
make this time memorable by deeds which philosophy applauds, and which
spring from the noblest principles of all human actions, namely, the love
of glory, founded on promoting the prosperity and happiness of mankind.
The above are the reasons on which the following decree is founded.

    “The Supreme Deputy, with the advice of the Privy Council,
    decrees—

    “1. There shall be established a central or principal school,
    according to the Lancasterian system, under the direction of
    Mr. Thomson.

    “2. The convent or college of St. Thomas shall be appropriated
    to this purpose. The friars at present residing in it shall
    remove to the large convent of St. Dominic, leaving only so
    many as are necessary for the service of the church attached to
    it.

    “3. In this establishment the elementary parts of education
    shall be taught, together with the modern languages. The
    teachers necessary for this purpose shall be appointed
    agreeably to the arrangements which will be pointed out in the
    plan for the National Institute of Peru.

    “4. At the expiration of six months all the public schools
    shall be shut, which are not conducted according to the system
    of mutual instruction.

    “5. All the masters of the public schools shall attend the
    central school with two of their most advanced pupils, in order
    to be instructed in the new system; and in studying it they
    shall attend to the method prescribed by the director of the
    establishment.

    “6. As soon as the director of the central school shall have
    instructed a sufficient number of teachers, these shall be
    employed, with competent salaries, in establishing public
    schools on the same principles in the capital city of each
    province of the state.

    “7. At the first public examination which shall take place in
    the central school, those masters who have been most attentive
    in learning the system, and shall have made such progress as to
    be able to conduct schools according to it, shall receive the
    reward of a gold medal, to be ordered for that purpose by the
    Minister of State.

    “8. For the preservation and extension of the new system
    the Patriotic Society of Lima is particularly requested and
    commissioned to take such measures as may be considered
    necessary for these purposes; and they are desired to make
    known to the government those things in which its co-operation
    may be required, in order effectually to carry forward this
    important object.

    “9. In order that the advantages of this system of education
    may be extended to the female sex, which the Spanish government
    has always treated with culpable neglect, it is particularly
    recommended to the Patriotic Society to take into consideration
    the most likely means for establishing a central school for the
    instruction of girls.

    “10. The salary of the director, and the other expenses
    necessary for this establishment, shall be defrayed by the
    government. The Minister of State is authorized to issue all
    the orders necessary for the punctual fulfilment of this decree.

    “Given in the government palace in Lima, 6th July, 1822.

                             (Signed)

                                                        “TRUXILLO.

               “By order of his Excellency, countersigned,

                                                   “B. MONTEAGUDO.”

As we go on in our operations, I shall communicate to you the result.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                             _Lima, 4th September, 1822._

The _first_ of September has returned, and has gone by. I have not,
however, failed in seizing an opportunity of writing you according to
our agreement. You know, I dare say, that we have not a post that leaves
Lima every morning for England. A vessel goes now and then from Callao
to Valparaiso, and through these two places, and across the Andes, and
through Buenos Aires, my letters to you are now obliged to travel. No
vessel has sailed for Chile since the 1st current; but in a few days the
French frigate lying here is to sail for Valparaiso.

I have now been upwards of two months in this city, and have all the
while enjoyed my health very well. I am inclined to think this climate
is better than I was led to expect from the accounts I had heard of
it. The tertian ague, however, is a disease very common, especially
during summer. Of the Englishmen I know here, three have had it since my
arrival. The general opinion, I think, is, that with great regularity
of living, this place is not unhealthy; but that the effects of
irregularity in the general mode of living, is more hurtful here than
in most other places. A good police would certainly contribute greatly
to the healthiness of this city. This will be enjoyed, I believe, in
due time; but the Government has so many things at present to do, that
some time may elapse before that improvement takes place. This is the
largest city I have yet seen in South America, and I believe there is
none larger in it. I do not, of course, include Mexico, which is in
North America. The houses here, and the general appearance of the city,
have a more commanding and richer aspect than what is met with in Buenos
Aires or Santiago de Chile. The general appearance of the population,
however, I think, is considerably inferior to what is seen in these two
places, particularly in the latter. One thing which contributes to this
difference, is the considerable proportion of slaves here. In Buenos
Aires, there are a good many of this class of our fellow-men, but fewer
than in Lima and Santiago; and in Chile, in general, there are very few;
and this is one thing which inclines me to prefer the general appearance
of Santiago to the other two cities I have mentioned.

About three weeks after my arrival here, San Martin set out for Quito, to
have an interview with Bolivar. They met in Guayaquil, as the President
of Colombia had left Quito, and reached that place before San Martin
landed. The interview was, I dare say, interesting, and I trust it will
be productive of good effects for the two countries of which they are the
Governors, and also for South America in general. A good understanding,
I trust, will be kept up between the nations of this continent, and war
in it I hope will be a thing as rare, and rarer than peace has been in
Europe. San Martin returned a few days ago, and has since re-assumed
the reins of Government, as “Protector of the liberty of Peru.” Every
exertion is making here for the formation of a congress. The greater part
of the representatives are already elected. All the liberated provinces
elect their own members for congress freely; the right of voting is,
I believe, much the same as in the United States. Representatives are
chosen for those provinces still under the dominion of the Spanish
army, from among the inhabitants of those places at present residing
in Lima. A fair representation seems to be desired and sought for, and
I hope will be attained in a considerable degree. All acts emanating
from such a body will, of course, give more general satisfaction, than
if the representation were partial. I do not trouble you with my views
of governments, whether monarchical or republican. Certainly, on this
subject, “much may be said on both sides.” Without fixing my mind for or
against this or that form of government, I am strongly in the opinion of
Pope, where he says, “Whate’er is best administered is best.” I do not
think, however, that all are fools, (as he insinuates) who, “for forms
of government contest.” The sum of the matter and the truth is, that
honesty and uprightness are more required, and have been less found in
all governments than any thing else. Wisdom, therefore, requires, that
such measures should be taken in arranging the form of government, as may
secure good conduct in governors, in the greatest possible degree.

There were some suspicions, some time ago, and some flying words, which,
if true, would have led one to suppose that San Martin wished to form
Peru into a monarchy. Who was to be king according to these reports,
I need not inform you, as I suppose you will find no difficulty in
guessing it at the first trial. The prime minister was of course in
the secret, if there was any such thing in hand. With this individual,
on other grounds, there was a good deal of dissatisfaction. This
dissatisfaction openly broke out a few weeks ago, on account of his
interfering in the election of representatives for this city. The
consequence was, that a petition was presented to the Marquis of
Truxillo, requesting that the minister might be immediately dismissed.
This petition was signed by so many of the respectable and powerful
inhabitants of the place, and presented with such firmness, that it had
the desired effect. The minister resigned before the petitioners left
the palace, and in a few days after, he was sent off by sea to Panama.
All this took place in San Martin’s absence, and the leaders in it were
the republican party. San Martin has very wisely fallen in with these
measures since his return, and has confirmed the new minister in his
situation. A republic, I think, is the general wish of the people, and as
the form of government is to be determined by the Congress, I have little
doubt of what the result will be.

You know, I dare say, that Colombia is free. The longest and severest
struggle of South America has been in that quarter. The first news
I heard on casting anchor in Callao, was that Quito had fallen into
the hands of the patriots. I think Bolivar, who has been the chief
instrument in the Colombian contest, is a great man. I was not at the
interview between him and San Martin, that I might take their comparative
dimensions at one view; but I may observe, that the general opinion, from
a view of the operations of both, is in favour of the Northern Chief. As
far as my own information and knowledge of each extends, I fall in with
this opinion. I do so, not from any dissatisfaction with San Martin. He
is to me, and has been uniformly, more than I could have expected, and I
may say, all I could wish. I believe both of these men are most sincerely
desirous of the real welfare of the countries which they respectively
govern, and of South America. There is no unholy alliance yet formed
in this country, and I think there never will. On all hands, light and
information are encouraged, sought after, and promoted. Knowledge, rich
with the spoils of time, has just unrolled her ample page in this city,
in a public library. This public institution is very respectably got up,
and already possesses a number of the best works in the various branches
of literature. It is inferior to the similar institution in Buenos
Aires; but superior, if we consider the short reign of civil, literary,
and religious freedom in Peru. Every individual is free to attend this
library every week-day, from 8 to 1, and from 4 to 6, without expense;
and every book in it is at his command during that time. This one view
of the present state of things here, shows at once the immense advantages
gained here by the revolution, and the blessings that tread in the steps
of liberty. I shall add one thing more to confirm what I have just said.
The Bible is now publicly sold at a short distance from the place where
used to sit the dreadful Inquisition. Perish all unrighteousness from the
earth! May the knowledge and love of God every where abound!

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                   _Lima, 9th Nov. 1822._

A considerable time has now elapsed since I last wrote you, and a much
longer time has intervened since I had the pleasure of receiving a letter
from you. Although I have not communicated with you directly during this
time, yet I suppose you are well acquainted with my various circumstances
in this part of the world, through means of my letters sent from time to
time to my friends in Edinburgh. Since my leaving my native country, I
have experienced much of the gracious goodness of our heavenly Father,
in directing my steps, in making darkness light before me, and crooked
things straight. The encouragements I have met with in my endeavours to
forward the Lord’s cause in South America, have been much greater than
could have been expected before the trial was made. I think a door has
been opened here which will never be shut, but which will, I trust,
from one year to another, open wider and wider, until it become, in the
Apostle’s language, “great and effectual.” Should I say, there are no
adversaries, and that all goes on prosperously, without any difficulty or
discouragement from any quarter,—should I say this, it would be nearly
the same as telling you, that a great miracle had taken place here, and
had changed the nature of man. You, of course, expect no such wonderful
accounts. At the same time, it is a gratifying thing to be able to
state, that far less opposition has been met with than was expected.
Difficulties, I believe, of whatever kind, will grow fewer and weaker as
Time runs on, bearing in his hand the torch of heavenly light; whilst,
on the other hand, means and opportunities of doing good will greatly
increase. It is surely a gratifying sight to see darkness fleeing away,
and the light of heaven breaking forth. You know there is no fellowship,
in any sense, between light and darkness, the one must give place to the
other. Wherever, then, darkness prevails, let the people of God look to
him who said, “Let there be light, and there was light;” and let them
use those means which he has appointed, under the full assurance, that
midnight shall give place to the dawning light, and that again to noon
day. That a great and happy change is about to take place in our hitherto
unfortunate, unhappy world, the Scriptures predict; and the days in
which we live say, “Lift up your heads, for this happy period draweth
nigh.” You who live in the land of Israel, whence the word of the Lord
is sounding out on all sides, see these things better than I can do in
this far distant country. From every corner of the earth messengers
are daily landing on your happy shores with tidings of joy. One says,
Babylon is fallen; another cries, the gods of the heathen are famished;
whilst a third shouts aloud, Satan falls like lightning to the ground. I
almost envy this felicity of yours; yet I would not exchange conditions
with you. Solitary and alone as I am here, I would not wish myself
elsewhere, because I believe I am placed where God would have me to be;
and, I trust, his work, in one shape or another, is all my concern. I do,
however, wish myself otherwise circumstanced. I should be glad to have
with me one or more with whom I could always communicate in the ways and
work of the Lord, and whose counsels and labours might prove a blessing
to me and to many. You, my dear brother, who dwell in Mount Zion, have
never experienced the disadvantage of being _thus_ alone. Should I come
into your thoughts when you bow your knees unto the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, I beg you to pray that grace, and mercy, and peace may
be multiplied unto me, and that the Lord’s work may prosper in South
America.

In my letters to Edinburgh since my arrival in this city, I have stated
the favourable reception I met with here from San Martin, and from
others in the government. Since that time, the state of affairs here, in
regard to politics, has considerably changed. San Martin has resigned
his authority in all its parts in this country, and is gone to Chile.
The Congress was installed on the 20th September, into whose hands he
delivered all the concerns of the government, and next morning, at four
o’clock, he set off for Chile. When he took the reins of government into
his own hands, under the title of “Protector of the Liberty of Peru,”
he promised to resign his authority as soon as a general Congress could
be assembled; and by his resignation at the time proposed, he justified
his sincerity in the eyes of the world. During the time he was in power,
reports were current that he was desirous to make himself king of
Peru. His conduct, however, has shown, that these reports were without
foundation. As far as my own affairs here are concerned, I should have
been glad that he had remained longer in the country, and, if I am not
mistaken, Peru would have been benefited by his stay. San Martin is an
intelligent and liberal-minded man. He is very desirous of promoting
the progress of South America in knowledge, and he is free from those
prejudices which hinder its advancement. The Congress has now been
assembled for several weeks, and has been occupied with various concerns
relative to the government of the country. From their own number they
have chosen three to discharge the duties of the executive government.
This triumvirate is to continue until a constitution be drawn up, and
a new Congress assembled, composed of representatives chosen in every
province of Peru. This complete representation of the country cannot
be obtained whilst the Spaniards are in possession of a considerable
part of it, as they actually are at this moment. At present there is
great distress felt here by the government, for want of money to carry
forward the operations of the war. This appears to be the chief obstacle
in preventing the general independence of Peru. Troops are not wanting,
as, in addition to those brought by San Martin, and those who have
since been raised in the country, General Bolivar has sent about 2,000
well-experienced troops from Quito, as affairs in that part have now been
brought to a favourable conclusion. The English merchants here have just
given the government a loan of 70,000 dollars, by way of helping them out
of their difficulties. An expedition sailed some weeks ago for Arica,
and we anxiously look for the result. All that part of the country is in
possession of the Spaniards, as well as nearly all the best provinces
of the kingdom. Notwithstanding the possessions which Spain still
holds in Peru, the independence of the country is not at all doubtful.
It may, indeed, by the mismanagement of the Congress, or by some other
misfortune, be retarded, but it must ere long completely prevail. I
believe there are no remains of the Spanish arms now existing in America,
except those in our neighbourhood, and about 1500 men in the isles of
Chiloe. What a change, in this respect, has taken place within these few
years past! And let not this revolution be considered as a small matter
by the man of benevolence and the Christian. The interests of religion
and of humanity are very closely connected with it. That once dreadful,
now innoxious house, the Inquisition, reminds me, as I daily pass it, of
the happy change which has taken place. True it is, that the Spaniards
have now put down the Inquisition throughout their dominions; still,
however, there are many inquisitorial things yet subsisting in Spain that
do not exist in the independent states of South America. Every effort has
been used by Spain to retard the progress of knowledge in America. These
days, however, have now gone by, and light of every kind begins to dawn
on these countries. My own opinion is, that the nations of South America
in a few years will far outstrip many of the nations of Europe. The
people here, to a certain extent, are conscious of their ignorance, and
are desirous of wiping out that stain which Spain has left upon them.

I have hitherto been speaking of the progress of knowledge in general
in South America, and its probable results. I shall now say something
of the progress making in the knowledge of religion. You know, of
course, that the Roman Catholic religion is the only religion professed
in this Continent—as it once was the only one in Great Britain.
Many are beginning to see through this system, and to find out its
inconsistencies. I wish I could also say, that all who see thus far,
have attained to the knowledge of the true religion, as laid down in
the New Testament. This, however, is not the case. On the contrary, I
am sorry to say, that deistical principles are espoused by the greater
part of those who get out of the trammels of popery. A good many in the
higher ranks, particularly in the army, are of this way of thinking. This
state of things need not surprise us. It is perhaps the natural result,
or transition, in those places where no other religion is known than
the one professed in this country. A man begins to see the absurdity
of the Catholic system, and from his infancy all that is religion with
him has been connected with it. In giving up this system, he gives up
with religion itself, as considering popery and it the same thing.
From these circumstances, I conceive this to be the most favourable
time for introducing, as far as can be done, the holy religion of
our Lord Jesus Christ. The present is the time for labouring in this
field, by introducing the Scriptures, and by every other means which
prudence may dictate. Prejudice is growing less every day, and this is
the result of the revolution. There is even a perceptible difference
between the different parts of this Continent in regard to the decrease
of prejudice. In Chile there is less than in Lima, because it has been
longer independent. Again, there is still less in Buenos Aires than in
Chile, for the same reason. Having mentioned Buenos Aires, I cannot
leave it without eulogizing it, in almost the highest degree, in regard
to the progress it is making. One reform succeeds another in rapid
succession. They are just about to put a stop to monachism, and to take
the church property into their own hands, paying the clergy out of the
public treasury. It is said also, that they are about to pass a law
for religious toleration. In every respect Buenos Aires now holds the
first rank among the cities and countries of South America. To have
one place thus stepping forward by way of pattern to the rest is of
immense advantage. There are several periodical works of a superior kind
issuing from the presses in that city. In these every subject is freely
discussed, prejudices attacked, and reforms proposed. The liberty of the
press is enjoyed and acted upon there in the same manner as it is in
England. The articles published in the Buenos Aires papers and magazines
find their way gradually into the papers of Chile and Peru, and thus
prepare the way in these places also for following up, ere long, the
same reforms and arrangements that are now going forward in the pattern
city I have mentioned. In this city, also, the liberty of the press is
enjoyed to a considerable extent. This, however, only commenced about two
or three months ago, upon the dethronement of the principal Secretary of
State. This individual, though a great friend to reform himself, and from
whom I met with every encouragement, wished to keep these things in his
own hand, at least for some time, and to grant the freedom of the press
by degrees. The plan of ecclesiastical reform published in Buenos Aires
was also published in the public paper of this city. Various other things
of a similar nature are thus indirectly brought under the consideration
of the people of Peru; and coming from Buenos Aires, they are better
received than they would be, coming from any part of Europe, especially
from a Protestant country. We had also an attack upon the friars of Lima
the other day, in one of the publications of this city, whose editor is
one of the Secretaries of Congress. These things you will consider as the
fruits of the revolution in South America; and the time fast approaches,
when we shall see still more abundant fruits, and those too of the best
kind. The Lord reigneth, let the earth be glad!

With respect to the climate of this place, you know, we are here fairly
within the torrid zone, the latitude of this city being 12° 2′ 51″ S.
A few days ago we had the sun vertical here, as he passed us on his
way to the southward. Notwithstanding our proximity to the equator, we
enjoy a very agreeable temperature. In the winter the sun but seldom
makes his appearance; in spring he shows himself more frequently; and in
summer he throws off reserve, and from his vertical throne looks down in
all his magnificence. From ten o’clock till two, it is pretty hot, but
about this hour a refreshing breeze springs up from the south, which is
very agreeable. It is generally said, that it never rains in Lima. This,
however, is not quite correct. It does rain a very little in the winter
season; but the drops, when they can be recognised as such, seem to have
passed through the finest rain sieve. It is, in short, rather a kind of
mist than rain, although at times it may be called by the latter name;
and when it is so, the people of Lima call it a heavy shower. Before I
came here I frequently heard this climate denominated unhealthy. The
tertian ague prevails a good deal, but on the whole I do not consider
this an unhealthy place. For my own part, I never enjoyed better health
than I have done since my coming to this city. Blessed be God for this
precious blessing!—There is one thing of a rather terrifying nature to
which this place is subject, I mean earthquakes. There is no place, I
suppose, more subject to them than this city. We have had several shocks
since I came to it; the greatest was on the 14th September. I was awaked
at a quarter past three o’clock in the morning by a _most dreadful_
noise. I was at no loss to know what this noise was, considering the
part of the world I was in. This noise continued for a few seconds, and
increased. The shock then followed, and made all the house shake, as if
the whole were coming to the ground. A loud hollow noise followed this
for a few seconds, and on its ceasing all was tranquil as before it
commenced, and those who had fled out of their houses quietly returned.
These phenomena are of frequent occurrence. There are, I believe, about
thirty earthquakes here in the course of a year. Those, however, which
throw down houses and produce other ravages are rare. Once in fifty years
seems to be about the period of those terrible visitations, and with
considerable regularity Lima has suffered severely at the return of this
fatal period. The city of Quito to the north, and of Arequipa to the
south, have also their periodical visitations.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                               _Lima, 2d December, 1822._

Some weeks ago a Committee of the Congress was entrusted to draw up
the _outlines_ of a political constitution for the country. This has
been accomplished, has been presented to Congress, and ordered to be
printed. The Congress is just now engaged in discussing it, article by
article. A good deal of interest is thus excited and kept up regarding
the subject, and, in consequence, the Congress-hall is daily well
attended by all classes. The discussion of the article on the form of
government, and that on religion, have excited the most attention. The
form of government has been unanimously declared to be republican,
agreeably to what I hinted to you in one of my late letters.—In “the
outlines,” the article on religion runs thus: “The religion of the state
is the Catholic Apostolic Church of Rome.” One of the members of the
committee wished to add the word _only_ or _exclusive_, but the rest not
agreeing to it, he entered his protest. On this account, as well as from
the general interest of the subject, the matter was keenly discussed.
I went, as you may well suppose, to hear what should be said on both
sides, and to see the result. The first who ascended the tribune to speak
was a clergyman, carrying in his hand a book about the size of a New
Testament. He began by stating, that it was his sincere desire that all
men might be of the Roman Catholic church. He then stated that the only
proper way, in his opinion, of bringing men into the church was, not by
force, nor by persecution in any shape, but solely by persuasion, by the
force of reason. After speaking a few minutes to this effect, he went
on to treat of the article as stated in the “outlines.” He regretted
the divisions among Christians, and the distinctive names one body and
another had taken. He then opened the book he had in his hand, which I
now found to be one of the Bible Society’s New Testaments, in Spanish.
He read the 12th and 13th verses of the first chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, and proceeded to make some remarks upon the
passage, and to apply it to the article in question. It appeared to
him, he said, very like the divisions censured by the Apostle Paul, to
see the article stated in the words, _Roman_, _Catholic_, _Apostolic_.
Having done this, he proposed that the article should be stated in this
manner:—“The religion of Jesus Christ, is the religion of the state.”
He then made some observations upon the propriety of stating it in this
way, in preference to the way in which it stands in the outlines, and
so concluded. As might have been expected, this alteration or amendment
was opposed. My memory is not so faithful as to give you the various
speeches upon the subject, but a great deal was said on both sides of the
question. In particular, the member of the Committee who had protested,
defended what he had done in a long speech, in which he paid but little
respect and fewer compliments to us foreigners. He concluded his long
story by saying, that he was so full of matter upon this subject, and
felt so much interest in it, that he could still speak four whole days
upon it. Another speaker got up with a volume of the Bible in his hand.
He turned to two passages in the law of Moses, where the children of
Israel were admonished to deal kindly towards strangers and foreigners,
and concluded by a short comment upon the passages in reference to the
subject in hand. In a country like this, where all the natives are of
the Roman Catholic Church, every thing that is said upon toleration has
a direct reference to foreigners, for it is never for a moment supposed
that any of the natives will leave the Roman Catholic Church to become
Protestants. The introduction of foreigners into the country, and the
consequent advantages and disadvantages of it, entered deeply into the
debate. I shall refer only to one speech more upon the subject. An
aged member, and a clergyman, rose up and said, “Gentlemen, this is
the first time I have risen to speak in this house, and it is not my
intention to detain you long. I understand,” said he, “that the grand
and principal features of our religion are these two:—To love the Lord
with all our heart and strength, and to love our neighbour as ourselves.
We must then take care,” continued he, “that our zeal for the _first_
of these two commandments does not make us overlook the _second_. Now
I ask, whether foreigners residing among us are to be considered our
neighbours or not. If they are, then we ought to love them. Gentlemen,
I have nothing further to add.” After being fully discussed, the votes
were taken. First, whether the article should stand as stated in the
outlines, or be altered. It was carried that it should remain as stated.
The next question was, if the word exclusive should be added, and it
was unfortunately carried in the affirmative. The article now stands
thus:—“The Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion is the religion of the
state, and the exercise of every other is excluded.”

We are not to be surprised that the matter has ended in this manner;
perhaps we should rather wonder that there was any one of the members
of the Congress disposed to speak, or even to think on the side of
toleration. The members who are friendly to religious liberty, may amount
to one third of the whole, or, perhaps, somewhat more than one third, and
they are men of influence and respect in the country. These made a less
vigorous stand for toleration at the present time, from the consideration
that what is done now in regard to the sanctioning of the basis of the
constitution, is only provisional. The Spaniards, at present, possess
many of the best provinces of Peru, and these provinces have, strictly
speaking, no representatives in the Congress. The manner of proceeding,
in reference to these provinces, was this:—The natives of each province,
residing in Lima, met and chose members from among themselves to
represent the province, until such time as the enemy be dislodged, and
they have freedom to choose their own representatives. As soon then as
the country is free, the present Congress will dissolve itself, and a
general Congress will be immediately elected, and the outlines now under
consideration will be presented to the new Congress to be examined, and,
if judged necessary, altered. There is, therefore, still some hope,
that toleration may have a place in the Peruvian constitution. During
the interval, the press may forward the good cause, as there is perfect
freedom for speaking and printing any thing upon the subject, on both
sides of the question. We may, indeed, call this freedom of speaking and
writing upon the subject, a kind of toleration; at all events, it is a
prelude to it.

Pamphlets of every shape, size, and name, are issued from the press. In
these every subject is handled, and abuses and prejudices are attacked
with freedom and courage. The poor friars are not overlooked in these;
almost every body is against them, and none seems to rise up in their
defence. One of the members of Congress has made a motion for the
reformation of the Convents. The bill he is about to bring in, contains
four articles. The first is to allow all those to leave the Convents who
wish to do so. The second is to allow no one in future to become a friar.
The third is, that the government should take possession of all their
property, and allow them out of it what is necessary for their support.
The fourth article is, to make them all live in _one_ convent, instead of
occupying _fourteen_, as they now do. This you see is a bold proposition,
and, if carried into effect, will be a great step in reformation.

At the time the article on religion was under consideration, a certain
individual went about with a paper containing a petition to Congress,
praying that the Roman Catholic religion might be the religion of the
state, _and the only one tolerated in the country_. The last part of
the petition was the object he had in view. He obtained a number of
signatures to the petition, and without loss of time laid it before the
Congress. It was, however, not allowed to be read, and several were for
calling this individual to account for his officiousness. This medical
gentleman (for he is of that profession) has been sadly handled in the
pamphlets of the day for this conduct; so much so, I think, as to keep
him from being forward to engage a second time in such an undertaking.
I have already mentioned how freely all matters are discussed in these
pamphlets. One of them has just begun to give a history of the Popes.
From the specimens already published, this history promises not to be
very honourable to the personal character of the Popes, neither does it
appear intended to strengthen their pontifical authority and influence,
but quite the contrary. There was a monthly magazine published in London,
during the despotic reign of the present Ferdinand. In this work there
was given a history of the Popes, and I believe what is publishing here
just now is copied from the work I have mentioned. This magazine was
called El Español Constitucional. It was written by one of those who had
fled from Ferdinand’s despotic hands. He was a liberal man, and writing
in London he felt himself under no restraint in speaking of the abuse
of the Church of Rome. There was another periodical work in the Spanish
language, published some years before it, called El Español. This was
also printed in London, and was written with the same liberality and
spirit. Both these works have reached South America, and have been a good
deal read; and, as you may suppose, they have served considerably to
enlighten the people of these countries.

I have mentioned, in some of my late letters, the very gratifying
circumstances of the rapid sale in this city of 500 Spanish Bibles,
and 500 New Testaments. These were all sold off in _two days_, and as
many more could have been sold in the two days following, but there
were no more, and thus many were disappointed. From this cheering
circumstance, I am daily looking with great anxiety for a considerable
number of both Bibles and Testaments, expected from the Bible Society.
The above-mentioned circumstance is truly encouraging, as no desire at
all comparable to it, has yet been manifested in any other part of South
America for the Holy Scriptures. From this, and some other occurrences, I
am led to anticipate that the word of God will, indeed, have free course
in this place, and let us pray that it may not be circulated only, but
that it may be glorified also. I have another thing to relate to you,
perhaps more cheering still. It is this: the nearly confident expectation
of getting the New Testament introduced throughout Peru as a school book.
I trust this expectation will not be disappointed, but verified in due
time. Every thing promises fair at present for its accomplishment.

As soon as the Bibles got into circulation as above-mentioned, there was
some ferment excited from reports that it was not fairly printed from the
Spanish version of Scio, as indicated in the title page. This report was
raised, or at least increased, by the discovery of a typographical error
or two. An honest priest actually burned the Bible he had bought on the
discovery of one of these oversights in the printing. The consequence of
this stir was an examination of the Bible Society’s edition, by comparing
it with the edition printed in Spain. The result of this examination
was highly satisfactory, as the London edition was found to be an exact
reprint from the latest Spanish edition, with the exception of some
slight oversights in passing through the press. About the time this
matter was under consideration, the deputy Archbishop (for there is no
Archbishop here at present) having learned that a certain priest was
likely to say something from the pulpit against the reading of the Bibles
from London, sent a message to him, telling him “not to preach any thing
against the reading of the English Bibles.” By English Bibles he meant
Bibles from England, for the Bibles were in the _Spanish_ language.

A curious little piece, in the poetic form, appeared about a fortnight
ago in one of the newspapers of this city. There is a great deal of truth
and force in it, and as it is but short, and will not occupy much room,
I shall give you a translation of it. To do it justice it should be put
in poetic dress, but as you know I am neither poet nor rhymester, you
will please accept of it in plain prose. “_Simon possessed a fishing
bark_, and just a fishing bark, nothing more he left to his sons. They
however were great fishers; they caught much and grew rich, and could
no longer be content with their small bark, but got a larger one. This
bark afterwards became a brig, and then a ship. At last it grew into a
man-of-war, and frightened the world with its cannon. How wonderfully is
this ship of war now changed! how different now to what it was in former
times! This great ship is now grown old, and, shattered by the storms it
has encountered, it now lies rotting in the harbour. A thousand times has
it been repaired, but at last it must be laid aside altogether, and its
owners must once more be content with _Simon’s fishing bark_.” You will
find no difficulty, I dare say, in applying this little piece, and, I
believe, you will join with me in wishing that the concluding part may
be verified as exactly as the preceding parts have.

There is a great revolution going forward in South America. I speak not
of the revolt from under the Spanish yoke, for that in the present day
may be said not to be going forward, but accomplished. The revolution
I speak of, is a moral one. Those who have eyes to see this goodly
prospect, and those who have ears to hear the harmony of this moral
change, meet on every hand with indications of its approach. You will not
understand me as saying, that South America has become like the land of
Eden, like the garden of God. No. But a change has been begun, a happy
change. Let us put our hand to this work. Let us bear it onward, and God
Almighty will consummate it in due time.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                              _Lima, 28th January, 1823._

A good while has elapsed since I mentioned to you any particulars of
my affairs in reference to the schools. During this time, however, I
have more than once thrown out hints, signifying that matters went on
but slowly. I had too much reason for these complaints. The truth is, I
was once and again on the point of leaving this place. My affairs here
have been such, since my arrival, that I may truly say, my hopes and
prospects in South America never were so high, and never were so low
as they have been, at different times, in Lima. I formerly stated to
you the very favourable reception I met with from San Martin, and from
the first Secretary of State, Monteagudo. Both of these left this place
a good while ago, although under different circumstances. To me their
loss was severely felt. I never mentioned a wish to San Martin, or to
Monteagudo, that was not granted, and granted immediately in the most
obliging manner. After their going away, I scarcely mentioned any thing
I wished done that was not refused. I should not, perhaps, say refused,
for I was not actually denied; I was told that the things I stated would
be done, but these promises were never fulfilled. Had I been plainly
refused, there is every probability that I should have left this place
long ago. After experiencing a number of delays, and when my little stock
of patience was all gone, I asked for my passport. The same individual,
however, who had so often put me off with fair promises, contrived to put
off my passport also, and kept me waiting days together, with every thing
nailed up for my departure. It was then agreed on between us, that since
the school plan we had in view could not be carried into effect from want
of funds, I should stop three or four weeks to instruct some individuals
in the Lancasterian system. About twelve came, in consequence of this,
to my lodgings once a day, for the instructions referred to. At the
close of the time mentioned, these individuals were much pleased with
the new plan, and some of them represented the matter to the minister,
who gladly entered into it, and it was agreed that I should stop, and
that what was wanting should be granted. I did think him for this time
sincere, and I believe he was so; but I was again subjected to be put
off from week to week, until I found that I was circumstanced exactly as
before. I petitioned anew for my passport, and in the mean time wrote a
letter to the Congress, detailing all that had happened from the time of
my arrival in Lima, and concluded by stating, that I intended to leave
this place by the first vessel that sailed, but that I would return or
send some person instructed in the plan of the schools, if a desire
should be expressed by the Congress to that effect. The result of this
communication was far beyond my expectation. Upon my letter being read, a
great deal of interest was taken in this matter, and it was unanimously
agreed to that the school should be commenced as soon as possible. An
order was accordingly issued, that every thing I wanted to set it agoing
should be immediately granted. When I wrote to the Congress, I had little
thought that they would be disposed to carry this object forward at the
time, having not long before resolved to use the utmost economy with the
public money, and to carry nothing forward that was not of an urgent
nature. This resolution was very necessary from the low state of the
public funds, owing to their limited resources, and the great expenses
of the war. In consequence of the decree of the Congress in our favour,
I at once gave up thoughts of leaving this place, and we have been
since that time getting on as fast as can be expected. There is another
circumstance of considerable importance, which has arisen out of this.
The person who brought together those twelve individuals to be instructed
in the system, as above mentioned, is a very respectable clergyman. This
gentleman has interested himself much in the matter, and has been named
by the Congress to take an active part in all the arrangements necessary
until a School Society be formed. I have had much intercourse with this
individual, and have good reason to esteem him highly. We go hand in
hand in our affairs most comfortably. As this gentleman’s name is now
connected with the schools, and being a clergyman, many prejudices are
thereby removed. This is a matter of no little importance, as there was a
strong idea, (whether well or ill founded, I cannot tell,) that the late
Secretary, of whom I spoke, was atheistical in his views. Perhaps his
atheism consisted in his making free with the convents and other church
affairs. However that may be, my being favoured by him probably excited
some prejudices, in addition to those arising from my being a Protestant.
The counteracting influence, therefore, of my connexion with my present
clerical friend will, I have no doubt, be greatly advantageous. When
I add to this, that it is through this respectable individual that I
expect the New Testament to be introduced into the schools, of which I
formerly wrote, you will see that I have great cause for thanksgiving
for the circumstances in which we now stand; and I am even inclined to
believe, from what I have seen, that our present encouraging prospects
have not been too dearly purchased by all the harassing delays that we
have experienced. We are very short sighted in all things, and can seldom
tell what string of circumstances may end most favourably. Hence it is
that we are often joyous, when we have not much real cause for being so;
and on the other hand, we are often sad, when every thing is going on in
the most prosperous manner. How consoling is the thought, that we are
permitted to cast all our cares upon God; upon him who knows the end from
the beginning, and in whose hands, sooner or later, every thing must turn
out well.

I think I have perceived, during the time I have been in this place, a
greater desire to study the English language than I have met with in any
other part of South America. I have uniformly encouraged this desire
as much as possible, being fully persuaded that the knowledge of our
language, and of the excellent works it contains, will contribute in no
inconsiderable degree to the progress of this country in every point of
view. Want of books suitable for beginners in this language has formed
a considerable obstacle, as well as the want of suitable teachers. In
order to remove these difficulties to a certain degree, and to carry
forward this useful object, I some time ago set to work to prepare, in
Spanish, a grammar of the English language. This is now finished, and
nearly all printed. I have at the same time been getting ready a small
book, consisting of extracts from various authors in our language, for
something of this kind was equally necessary. This little work is also
pretty far advanced in the printing. In the next place, in order to carry
this object into immediate effect, I lately published my intention of
giving instructions in the English language, and I now have twenty-three
studying it with me, two of whom are members of Congress.

Accounts have reached us, that on the 19th November last, a severe
earthquake was experienced in Chile. The first shock was felt about 11
o’clock at night, and was preceded by a frightful noise. During the
night, and for several succeeding days, a number of shocks were felt,
less destructive, I believe, but sufficiently alarming. We have not
yet had full information as to the extent of country over which these
shocks have been experienced, but from what reports have reached us,
it seems to have extended over the greater part of Chile. The greatest
damage, we understand, has been done in Valparaiso. In that place several
houses have been thrown down, and all the churches have been severely
injured. Accounts say that more than two hundred people have perished in
Valparaiso alone. Many are the blessings which Providence has poured out
on Chile, and one would almost think that earthquakes have been added,
by way of giving to it its due proportion of evil. The same may be said
of this country, which has suffered still more from this cause than
Chile has done. We do not know _the moment_ we may be visited in this
city, by one of these dreadful calamities which have laid Lima nearly in
ruins at different times. To remind us of our danger, as it were, we are
visited by small shocks from time to time; a month rarely elapses without
one, and about a week ago we had two in one day. One would naturally
think that the being continually exposed to these catastrophes would
be productive of some happy moral effects upon the inhabitants of this
place. I am sorry to say there are no appearances of these good results.
If a comparison were to be instituted between the people of this place,
and those of other parts of South America, in regard to morals, I am
afraid Lima would appear in the back ground. The most imminent danger,
the most signal judgments, seem somehow or other to be productive of
nothing but momentary effects on mankind. Wherever this danger or these
judgments are, there the words of Jesus are verified; “If they believe
not Moses and the prophets, neither would they be persuaded though one
should arise from the dead.” I question much if we should, in one sense,
find fault with this disposition of mankind; or shall I say rather with
this arrangement of Providence. It points out to us, I think, how much
happier and more solid effects may be produced by the wielding of the
word of God, than by wielding the mountains, and casting them into the
sea. _The word of God_ is a _fire_, and is a _hammer_, and nothing shall
be able to stand before it; every thing that opposeth shall be reduced
into ashes or into dust; and these shall be blown away by the winds, to
be seen no more for ever.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                  _Lima, 3d March, 1823._

I have more than once, my dear friend, within these few days past,
heard the exclamation, “happy are the countries that enjoy a settled
and secure government.” The truth is, we have just experienced one of
those occurrences which frequently happen in revolutionary times. I
wrote you formerly, that three individuals of the members of Congress
were exercising the executive power in this place. From events which
have lately occurred, a general dissatisfaction towards this triumvirate
was felt by the army in the neighbourhood of this city. The consequence
of this was, that the troops drew near to the walls and shut the gates,
sending at the same time a message to the Congress, requesting, or
rather ordering, a change in the government. After a good deal of
deliberation, the triumvirate was removed by the Congress. Another step
was yet necessary, as a certain individual was pointed out as the only
person capable of filling the vacant situation. There was no alternative
in this more than in the other proposition, as a part of the troops
kept their station, as before mentioned, whilst the rest or the greater
part came into the great square in the centre of the city. Indeed the
public opinion, not of the army only, but also of the great majority of
the people, seemed clearly expressed in favour of the person proposed.
The individual in question was accordingly appointed by the Congress as
“President of the Republic of Peru.” This was done on the first current.
The troops have retired, and there seems to be a general satisfaction
with this appointment. Our President’s name is Don José de la Riva Aguera.

You will naturally wish to know how our new President is likely to
act regarding the schools, and other such matters. Respecting what
his conduct will be in these things, I have great confidence. I have
known him, and visited him occasionally since my arrival in Lima, in
consequence of a letter of introduction to him, with which I was favoured
on my leaving Chile. I have uniformly found him very obliging, and
much interested in our concerns. In short, he is the very individual
I should have named, had I been asked what person I wished to have in
this high station. I called on him this afternoon in company with my
clerical friend, whom I formerly mentioned to you. We were well received,
and encouraged to go forward in our work, with the assurance of his
protection and support.

I forgot to mention to you in my last quarterly letter, that I had about
that time got one added to the number of my friends. This person is a
very respectable clergyman, and a member of the Congress. We have had
several conversations together, in a very open and friendly manner. I
have been much pleased with his candour and frankness. He told me that
when he first heard of my having come to Lima, he resolved to oppose me,
but that when he learned that I was not an opposer of religion, but a
friend to it, he changed his mind, and resolved to befriend me as far
as lay in his power. There is a kind of idea among several of those who
are the most religious in this country, that many or most foreigners who
arrive here are deists or atheists, or at least men no way friendly to
religion. Grounds have, no doubt, been given for forming this opinion,
although I think it is generalized among the class of people I mentioned,
with some degree of illiberality, as is, indeed, commonly the case.
The books which come here in favour of deism and atheism strengthen
the opinion. Most of these are printed in France, but some of them, I
am sorry to say it, are printed in England. From all I have seen here,
both in the Congress, and out of it, I am strongly inclined to think
that those who oppose toleration, or at least many of them, do so with a
view to prevent the influx into the country of such as oppose or scoff
at religion. As a proof of this, I refer to the member of Congress,
of whom I have just been speaking. This man opposed toleration when
it was discussed in the Congress, and spoke publicly against it; yet
when conversing with him upon the subject, he told me that he was not
opposed to the toleration of Protestants in the country. I have taken
occasion at different times to point out to some of the members, in
private conversation, that their law prohibiting the public religious
exercises of those who differ from the Catholic church, does not hinder
atheists and deists from settling in the country, as these have no form
of religion they wish to practise; and that this law serves only to
prevent the coming of those men who are sincerely religious and moral,
and who, as they themselves admit, would be of great use in the country,
by bringing into it many branches of the arts and manufactures. I think
I have observed some good effects arising from these conversations, and
I wish it may so appear when, the subject comes before Congress a second
time.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                  _Lima, 26th May, 1823._

A considerable time has now elapsed since I last wrote you. I confess I
have acted wrong in delaying so long; but I know that yourself and the
Committee of the British and Foreign School Society are ready to forgive.
The truth is, I have had no heart to write you; I have had nothing
encouraging to communicate; and I am never fond of being a messenger of
evil tidings. I have been bandied about these many months past, without
being able to make any progress in those highly important affairs in
which you feel so deeply interested. I have been more than once on the
eve of leaving this part of South America, but one little encouragement
or another called me back just as I was going to embark, and flattered me
into a belief that all would go on well. I shall not detain you with a
long list of grievances, but shall pass at once to the more pleasing task
of calling on you to join with me in thanksgiving unto Him who comforteth
those that are cast down, and who hath turned my darkness into light.
Blessed be his name, the prospects of something being done in this place
brighten daily, and I hope yet to communicate to you something gladdening
from the land of the Incas.

We have, at length, got our school fairly begun, and under very
favourable auspices. I formerly mentioned to you that the government had
given us for our schools, the College belonging to the Dominican Friars.
The whole of the edifice is at our disposal for school objects. We have
fitted up for our present school-room, a large apartment, formerly
the college dining-room, which will contain 300 children. The number
attending at present is upwards of a hundred; and we intend to increase
it gradually rather than rapidly, as we might do were we inclined. The
experience I have had has taught me the necessity of this. It is an easy
matter to tell what the system is, and to say things are to be managed in
such and such a way; but the great difficulty consists in reducing it to
practice, in training the children to method.

The Congress and the Government here are decidedly in favour of
education. Their object is not merely the education of the few, but the
education of the many, namely, of every individual in Peru. The attention
of the Congress is, at present, engaged in drawing up a constitution
for the nation. One of the articles already sanctioned is, that no one
can vote for a member of Congress unless he can read and write. From
the consideration, however, of the shameful neglect of the Spaniards
in promoting education in the country, these literary qualifications
are not to be exacted until the year 1840. Time is thus given for every
individual to qualify himself in these matters; and the anxious desire of
the Congress is, I am fully persuaded, to carry forward education with
all possible rapidity.

You are aware, I suppose, that the inhabitants of Peru do not all speak
the Spanish language. The descendants of the ancient Peruvians are very
numerous, and most of them speak the language of their ancestors. In
some parts of the country they have assumed the manners and the language
of their conquerors and oppressors; but in other parts, and these by
far the most populous, their ancient tongue is their only medium of
communication. I have long had my eye on this interesting part of the
population of this country. I have, at length, obtained a fair prospect
of being able to plant schools among them, and also to hand to them the
word of God in their native tongue. An officer belonging to a regiment,
called the Peruvian Legion, and who thoroughly understands the _Quichua_,
or Peruvian, language, has taken a great liking to our system, and
is extremely desirous of benefiting his countrymen by communicating
instruction to them. He is, at present, attending our school for this
purpose, and I entertain a pleasing hope regarding the future results of
his operations.

I beg you to express to your Committee my sincere respect and gratitude
for the very obliging manner in which they have come forward in aid of
the great work of education in South America.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                             _Truxillo, 15th July, 1823._

When I wrote my last letter to Mr. S. I little thought my next letter
would be written in this place. Such, however, is the case, and I proceed
to mention the circumstances that have brought me here. It is probable
that what has lately taken place in Lima will reach your ears some days
before this comes into your hand. The Spanish army entered that city on
the 18th ultimo, the Government, the Congress, and a great number of
the inhabitants having left it on the preceding day. You will wonder
at this, I dare say, after the favourable account of our affairs in my
last letter. It has also been a subject of wonder unto us all, and of
consternation to not a few. I mentioned in my last, that the Spaniards
had collected a considerable force in Jauja. They had left Arequipa, and
collected in Jauja with the intention of coming down upon Lima. They had
made this movement when the independent army was sadly crippled, and
when there was no efficient force to oppose their taking possession of
the capital. When, however, reinforcements had arrived from Colombia,
and an expedition had been sent off to Arequipa, we little thought they
would persevere in their intention of attacking Lima. On the contrary,
we thought they would immediately retrace their steps with all speed
towards Arequipa or Cuzco, to secure to themselves the possession of
these valuable provinces. The event, however, has turned out otherwise,
and we now understand that they were badly informed as to the real state
of their opponents. The Spaniards crossed the Andes, and came down
towards Lima in a very rapid and unexpected manner, with a force of seven
thousand well disciplined men. Upon their presenting themselves in the
neighbourhood of the city, they were reconnoitred by the Independent
Generals, and as soon as the number and discipline of the Spanish army
were known, it was judged imprudent to risk a battle with them, as
the patriot army is but about five thousand strong, and many of them
recruits. The independent army considered it most advisable not only to
avoid a general battle, but also to avoid defending Lima, and chose to
retire to the forts in Callao. The Government and the Congress, together
with a great number of the principal inhabitants, retired at the same
time to Callao. A few days after, the President and Congress judged it
most suitable to remove from the scene of military operations, and to
take up a temporary residence in this city. They accordingly sailed for
this place, and arrived about a fortnight ago.

We were going on with our schools in a prosperous way on the 16th (June)
when the reports of the rapid approach of the enemy, and the general
confusion throughout the city, induced us to suspend our operations on
that day for a week, till we should see what would take place. It was
on that day quite uncertain whether the city would be defended, (for it
is surrounded by a good wall,) or whether the army would retire from
the city to Callao. On the following day, however, all doubt on these
points was removed, as it was agreed in a council of war to abandon the
city, and the army accordingly left it on the same day. At three o’clock
I left Lima and went down to Callao, being assured that the enemy would
enter the city that night, or at all events on the following day. I
slept that night (the 17th) on board of an English vessel, lying in the
harbour. It was my intention to return to Lima in four or five days, in
which time I supposed the Spaniards would be in quiet possession of the
place, and that order would be again restored, so that as an Englishman
I might pass to Lima with a passport from the English Commodore on the
station. I accordingly remained some days, on board the vessel, but there
was no possibility of passing from Callao to Lima with any safety during
that time. On the 20th the vessel I was in cleared out for the port of
Casma, about 200 miles to the north of Lima, and I conceived it most
advisable to go along with her, as there was no prospect of re-entering
Lima for some time. I therefore supplied myself with some dollars from
a friend, as I had left Lima without money, and with scarcely any other
clothes than those I had on. In two days we arrived safely in the port
of Casma, and on the day after our arrival I went up to the village,
which is about 8 miles distant. I was accompanied from Callao by an old
friend, a priest, and a prebendary of the cathedral of Lima. We made
ourselves acquainted with the Vicar, and were most hospitably lodged
in his house. Here we staid a week. During this time the accounts from
Lima continued as unfavourable as before, and numbers of people who had
fled from it were arriving at Casma, and others coming on towards it.
I resolved, therefore, to come on to this city, where I arrived safely
after four days travel through roads of burning sand, which were very
fatiguing to our horses and to ourselves. The roads all along the coast
of Peru are of this description. Here and there, at distances of from
twenty to forty miles, there is a river, and in the valley through which
it runs, vegetation of every kind shoots out luxuriantly, and nothing is
wanting but hands of industry to raise cotton, sugar, coffee, and all the
tropical fruits. My friend, the prebendary, remained in Casma, but I was
accompanied to this place by two other emigrants from Lima, and on our
arrival here we found not less than a thousand people of all conditions
under similar circumstances with ourselves. Numbers have since arrived,
and reports say that nearly ten thousand have left Lima, some having gone
to one place and some to another. Notwithstanding these unfavourable
circumstances, we expect all to return to the capital before long; it
may, however, be three or four months.

From what has been stated, you may perhaps think that the cause of
independence here is losing ground fast, or that it is in a hopeless
condition. This, however, is not the case. The Spaniards will, I believe,
be under the necessity of leaving Lima in the course of a very few
months; and in the mean time they have lost the valuable province of
Arequipa, as there are accounts of the safe arrival of the expedition
which sailed some time ago for that quarter, and of some advantages they
have already gained, and also of the speedy prospect of taking possession
of all that place, the Spanish force there being but small. The
independent army will probably march on towards Cuzco, where the Viceroy
is stationed with a force of about 3,000 men, and the ancient capital of
the Incas may very soon become the scene of the contest for liberty—the
contest of truth and freedom, with ignorance and oppression; and may the
righteous cause prevail.

I have long had a great desire of visiting some of the interior parts of
this country, and present circumstances offer a favourable opportunity.
I intend, in a day or two, to leave this city for Caxamarca, and from
thence I purpose to go to Jaen de Bracamoros. If the accounts I there
obtain are favourable, I shall go down the great river Marañon or
Amazon, as far as the mouth of the Huallága or the Ucayáli. I may then
perhaps ascend some of the rivers which fall into the Marañon from the
north, and go on in this way towards Quito. If I should be able to get
on so far, I shall then descend from Quito to Guayaquil, and from thence
by sea to Callao. I have got leave of absence for four months, and have
obtained a letter of recommendation from the President to the governors
of those places through which I intend to pass. I trust this journey
is undertaken with the same views which induced me to leave my native
country. I trust the Lord will protect me from every evil, will surround
me with his almighty arm, and will guide and comfort me by his Spirit.

P.S.—_21st July, 1823._——On the day after writing the above, some
accounts reached this place that the Spanish army was beginning to
retreat from Lima. In consequence of this, I deferred my journey until
certain accounts upon this subject should arrive. These accounts have
now been fully confirmed. The Spaniards began their retreat on the 8th
current, and the last division of their army was to leave Lima on the
evening of the 16th, or on the day following.

As Lima is now open, from the retiring of the Spaniards, I have given up
for the present my journey to the river Amazon, and to-morrow I set out
for Lima overland.

The day before yesterday the Congress was dissolved here, and a Senate
has been appointed in its stead.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                _Lima, 8th August, 1823._

My last letter to you was dated 9th November last, and which I hope came
safely into your hands. Though the interval between my letters to you be
considerable, yet I always suppose you acquainted with what occurs to me
here during these intervals, through my letters to our mutual friends
in Edinburgh. I therefore consider it unnecessary to go over all that
has happened here since I last wrote to you, and shall confine myself
to what is going forward at the present time. I am sorry that I have so
much to say that may be called of an unfavourable nature. In my letter
to Mr. H. from Truxillo, I stated the cause of my removal to that city,
and also the favourable change which had induced me to return. I arrived
safely in this place on the 2d instant, after an absence of nearly
seven weeks. I found, on my return, all that I had left behind safe,
nothing had been touched. The Spanish army continued in possession of
Lima just twenty-eight days, during which they did considerable injury
to the place, by levying contributions, confiscating property, &c. The
amount of the loss sustained, in one shape and another, is reckoned
at two millions of dollars. All the property belonging to the English
merchants, which was in their own warehouses, was respected, and no loss
was sustained thereon. What goods they had in the Custom-house they were
allowed to withdraw, upon paying a duty of forty per-cent. The other
goods in the Custom-house, belonging to the natives of the country, were
confiscated and sold on the spot. The favour thus experienced by the
English, was owing to the intervention of the British Naval Commander
in this place. The Spanish General, however, intimated to the English
merchants that although he had respected their property at this time,
yet in future he would not do so, but would confiscate all that belonged
to them, should he return again to Lima, and that thus they might
consider themselves as warned beforehand, of what they might expect. I
had heard in Truxillo that the Spaniards had destroyed the palace, the
mint, and some other public buildings. This, however, I am happy to
find, was incorrect: they have destroyed no buildings. The machinery of
the mint was destroyed; and they have carried off or destroyed all the
printing-presses and types they could lay their hands on. The government
printing-presses and types have escaped, as they had been removed to
Callao in good time. One or two presses also, belonging to private
individuals, have likewise been saved, having been hid at the time the
rest were carried off. I suppose you have read (and correctly too,) in
the descriptions of this city, that the churches are immensely rich in
silver. This, however, is not the case at present, I assure you. They are
now completely stripped of all their former grandeur in that respect.
The independent government at different times ordered considerable
quantities of the silver in the churches to be taken to the mint, which
was accordingly done. Upon their retreat from the city on the approach of
the enemy, a few weeks ago, nearly every thing of silver that could be
well spared from the churches, was carried to the castle in Callao, to
prevent its falling into the hands of the Spaniards. This proved a proper
foresight, for the enemy took almost every thing that had been left in
the churches, and thus thoroughly stripped them. A priest observed to me
the other day, that it should seem the time is now come when God chooses
to be served with less splendour, and with more humility. The observation
was good; and I wish the time were indeed come when the supporters of
this system would lay aside their own riches and righteousness in every
respect, and would clothe themselves with the righteousness of Christ,
and with true humility. That period is, I trust, advancing, although
perhaps not so fast as we could wish. The Lord, however, will bring
it about in due time. The way we generally wish to do things, in our
impatience, is to jump to our object; or in other words, to gain our
benevolent ends all at once. This, however, is not the way the Almighty
has established matters in the depth of his wisdom. The end, he tells us,
may be gained, yea, and shall be gained, but it can be gained only by the
use of the appointed means, and by patient continuance in well doing.

The Spanish army has marched towards Arequipa along the coast. The first
division under General Valdes is already at some distance, but the second
division, under Canterác the Commander in chief, is only about 100 miles
to the south of us. There is, however, I believe, little danger at
present of his returning to Lima, as the main object of the Spaniards
is to attack as early as possible the patriot army in Arequipa. That
army is now of considerable strength, and much better equipped every way
than the former one in that place, which was so completely defeated by
the Spaniards at Moquegua. I wish the result may be favourable to the
independent cause, as much certainly depends on the result.

I mentioned in my letter to Mr. H. that the Congress had been dissolved
in Truxillo, and that a Senate had been appointed in its place. This was
the single act of the President, and it was certainly a very bold and
imprudent step, not to say any thing of its injustice. The President has
not yet returned to Lima, and in the mean time a strong opposition has
been stirred up against him here for having dissolved the Congress. The
representatives now in Lima have solemnly protested against this measure,
have re-installed themselves as the supreme council and government of
the nation, and have elected the Marquis of Truxillo to exercise the
executive power. What will be the result of these operations I know not.
It is probable, I think, that Riva Aguera, the President, will give in,
and be banished from the country for some time, it is certainly a very
unfavourable time for internal disputes. A short time, I hope, will make
all things wear a more smiling aspect, and may the Lord who reigneth in
the earth, grant that this may indeed be our case. All things are in
his hand. He ever reigneth, although his benignant hand may at times be
invisible to us.

During the time I was at Truxillo, I formed the plan of visiting some of
the aboriginal inhabitants of America, on the banks of the river Amazon.
I had calculated that the Spaniards would keep possession of this city
for about three months, and I supposed, that time would about suffice
me for my intended tour. I had bought a number of glittering buttons,
needles, scissors, knives, fish-hooks, ribbons, &c., for presents to
the natives. I had also taken out my passport, and was arranging for
setting out, when accounts reached Truxillo, that a part of the Spanish
army had evacuated this city. In consequence of this, I put off my
intended journey, though with regret, in order to return to my duties
in this place. I have long had a desire to visit those parts, and though
I have not been able to effect my object at this time, my purpose is
not laid aside, but only postponed until a more favourable opportunity
occur; and in the mean time I will go on collecting all the information
I can, regarding those quarters. I have a considerable desire to spend
the greater part of my remaining days on the banks of that great river,
or on the borders of some of its tributary streams. In the Mercurio
Peruano, a work of which I dare say you have heard, there are some very
interesting accounts of the entrance of the Jesuits and of the Franciscan
Friars into that part of the country. Their success was various. Numbers
of the missionaries lost their lives in prosecution of their object,
through the cruel hands of those whom they went to instruct. At length
the missions in those parts made some progress, but they never were very
flourishing; and even in their best state, missions under such a system
were open to many objections. One single Moravian village in the midst
of some wilderness would be a more gratifying sight than all the Jesuit
missions put together. Though we may thus condemn their system, because
truth requires it, yet the Missionaries themselves, generally speaking,
in point of zeal and devotion to their object, are worthy of great
commendation, and in many instances their conduct forcibly attracts our
admiration. The accounts they have published are extremely interesting.
In another point of view, also, the Missionaries have done a great
service, by their study of the original languages, and by the grammars
and dictionaries of these which they published. The whole of these works
are by the Jesuits, and not a volume has been published since their fall.
These grammars and dictionaries are now extremely scarce in this place.
It has cost me a great deal of labour to obtain some of them, and others
I have not yet been able to procure, but hope in time to get a copy of
all their writings on those subjects, as well as of the geographical
works they have published.

I believe it is not generally known in Europe that a great part, the
majority of the inhabitants of Peru, are of the descendants of the
ancient Peruvians under the Incas. An idea is, I believe, pretty general
with you, that the Spaniards nearly exterminated this race, as they
did the inhabitants of St. Domingo and Cuba. That they destroyed vast
numbers of the indigenous inhabitants of this part of the world is,
alas! too true; still, however, the majority here are Peruvians, and
not Spaniards. There are, of course, a good many of a mixed race, and
on the coast there are not a few of the sons and daughters of unhappy
Africa, and their descendants. The Peruvians who live in the towns on
the coast, all speak the Spanish language, and know nothing of the
ancient language of Peru, called the Quichua. Between the coast and the
ridge of the Andes, called the Cordillera, there are many towns, the
inhabitants of which generally speak the Quichua and the Spanish, with,
however, a predilection for their own native tongue. On the east of the
Cordillera of the Andes, the Spanish language is but little spoken, and
both Peruvians and Spaniards speak the Quichua. It is spoken, of course,
with more or less purity, in these different places, a circumstance to be
fully expected of an unwritten language, and among an uneducated people.
I have had my attention turned to those parts of this country where the
Quichua language is spoken ever since I came to Peru. I have had a great
desire to communicate, in one way or another, to this ancient people, the
blessings of education and the light of the Sacred Word. The Spaniards
have kept them in the lowest state of mental existence, and it may be
truly said, that under the Incas, the Peruvians were less ignorant, and
more virtuous, than they are at this day. At the time the Spaniards
(these enemies of knowledge) drove us from our post here, on their
entrance into Lima, we had in our school two descendants of the ancient
Peruvians studying our system, with a view to carry instruction among
their countrymen; whilst another of the same people was actually engaged
in translating one of the Gospels into the Quichua language. I hope we
shall be able to muster our forces again, and to go on in this good work.
Pray for us that the blessing of the Almighty may be upon us, to crown
us with speedy and certain success.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                             _Lima, 1st September, 1823._

I mentioned in a former letter, that the members of the Congress who were
in Lima had united and re-installed this assembly. Their number daily
increased, by the arrival of those who had fled to various quarters upon
the arrival of the Spaniards. Riva Aguera was left in Truxillo with a
very few only of those he had chosen for his senate. The public opinion
in favour of the Congress, is very strong, and all seem to rejoice in its
restoration.

Several accounts have reached us of advantages gained by the patriot
troops in the south, but the good effects of these upon us are greatly
lessened by the continual dread we are in of the operations of Riva
Aguera, who has got collected together about 3,000 men. Fulminations by
the Congress have been issued against him, calling him tyrant, &c. &c.
and exhorting every good patriot to use his endeavours to bring him to
this city, dead or alive.

This commencement of internal war is looked upon by all who feel an
interest in the independence of the country, as a very unfortunate
circumstance. A powerful enemy is at hand, and ready to seize every
opportunity which such divisions may occasion, in order to subject the
country to its former state. In fact we were, about a fortnight ago, in
great alarm for some days, from a rumour of the return of the Spanish
army. A happy circumstance, however, has this day taken place, which
will, I trust, unite all parties in one. This fortunate circumstance
is the safe arrival of Bolivar. He landed this morning in Callao, and
entered Lima this afternoon, to the very great satisfaction of all. He
has brought with him upwards of 2,000 men, and more it is said are to
follow. The general aspect of the war is now greatly in our favour,
and I think the Spanish army is rather critically placed. Some letters
have been intercepted from one of the Spanish Generals to La Serna,
giving rather a sad account of his situation, and mentioning some of his
officers of whose loyalty he had not great confidence. From all these
circumstances, I trust the time is not far distant when this unhappy and
destructive war will give way to peace and to liberty.

When in Truxillo, I made some arrangements for the circulation of the
Scriptures in that quarter. There is a medical gentleman there, a native
of Ireland, of the name of O’Donovan. He is of the Roman Catholic
religion, but he has none of those prejudices against the Bible which
many of the Catholics have. So far is he from being prejudiced upon
this point, that he takes a very great interest in its circulation,
and recommends it strongly to all his friends. This is a very happy
circumstance, and I hope the results will be truly beneficial. Being a
Roman Catholic himself, what he says upon this subject has more weight
than the same things would have from a Protestant. Since my return to
Lima, I have sent him 50 Spanish New Testaments, and a number of Spanish
tracts, which I got some time ago. He mentioned to me the effects
produced by some tracts which he formerly had. He said he gave a few
of them to his neighbours, and some time after inquired how they liked
them. Some of them told him plainly that they did not like them at all,
and that these tracts were not _the Gospel_, because there was nothing
said about _the Sacraments_ in them. You would not, he replied, have the
Sacraments spoken of _every where_, and nothing but the Sacraments? Let
me read, continued he, a chapter of one of the Gospels to you. He then
took his New Testament, and read to them accordingly a chapter from one
of the Gospels. Now, said he, is there any thing about the Sacraments in
what I have just read to you? They said there was not. And is not _this_
the Gospel, said he? They agreed that it was. Well then, he continued,
may not these tracts be Gospel too, although there is nothing of the
Sacraments in them. I trust the Lord will bless the exertions of this
worthy individual to circulate the knowledge of God around him.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                             _Lima, 25th November, 1823._

What a cheering thought it is, to contemplate the glorious exertions of
the present day, to put the Sacred Scriptures into the hands of _all_.
The names of barbarian, Scythian, bond and free, have disappeared in the
distribution of this noble charity; and the only distinction known is,
those who have this volume, and those who have it not. The present mighty
efforts bid fair to make this only distinction among mankind disappear
also; and may it be soon fulfilled; thus leaving every soul in possession
of that treasure which can alone make his soul valuable.

I am happy to say that something has already been done here, and that
the prospects for the future are encouraging. Perhaps there have been
circulated, during these few years past, about one thousand copies of the
whole Bible, in the Spanish language, and considerably upwards of that
number of New Testaments, in the same tongue. It is true, this is but a
small number among so many; yet it is a good beginning; and you know we
ought not to despise small things, but receive them with thanksgiving,
and as encouragements to perseverance.

Immediately after the rapid sale of the 500 Spanish Bibles, and 500 New
Testaments in this city, as mentioned in my letter of October 18th,
I wrote to London for a large supply, although I was then in daily
expectation of some arriving. The supplies sent by the British and
Foreign Bible Society, and which I was then expecting, arrived, as I
afterward learned, in Buenos Aires and in Chile, but none of them reached
this place. I remained for a long time in great anxiety about the arrival
of a supply for this city, and country adjacent. After waiting for
several months, I received a letter from the Society, informing me that
the whole edition of the Bible had been disposed of, but that 5000 New
Testaments would be sent me as soon as they could be bound. These have
not yet arrived, but I am in hourly expectation of them.

I come now to speak of a new translation of the New Testament, which I
am endeavouring to procure in this place. I suppose you are aware that
the greater part of the inhabitants of Peru are the descendants of the
ancient Peruvians. The language spoken by the Peruvian nation in the
time of the Incas is called the Quichua; and this language, with some
variation, continues to be spoken to the present day by two-thirds of
the inhabitants of this country. Since my arrival in Peru, I have been
desirous of procuring a translation of a part or the whole of the New
Testament into this language. I have, at length, got it begun, and
under favourable circumstances. Two of the Gospels, the Acts of the
Apostles, and the two Epistles of Peter, are already translated into
this ancient tongue. The translation of the rest of the New Testament
is going forward, while the parts I have mentioned are a revising by
four gentlemen, who have cheerfully offered to take this labour upon
them. I am much pleased to see the interest these individuals take in
this matter; and it will, as it were, authorize this translation, when
it is considered that they have revised it. All the four are members of
Congress, and one of them is a clergyman. The gentleman who is engaged in
the translation is a descendant of one of the Incas, or kings of Peru,
and a native of the city of Cuzco. As soon as the parts I have mentioned
are thoroughly revised, I intend to print them at the expense of the
British and Foreign Bible Society. In the mean time, the translation
of the whole New Testament will go forward until it is completed. I am
also desirous of beginning with the Old Testament as soon as the New is
translated. This translation of the whole Bible, and the printing of an
edition of two or three thousand copies, will cost a considerable sum,
especially as printing is expensive in this country. I have written to
the British and Foreign Bible Society, requesting their instructions
regarding the extent to which they might wish me to go in this matter at
their expense. I trust they will authorize me to go forward in this work,
and to carry it into completion. As this, however, is an _American_ work,
I believe the American Bible Society would gladly come forward with their
aid to carry it into effect. This language is spoken by about a million
of people; and no other inducement should be necessary to interest Bible
Societies in regard to it. There are also two other languages spoken in
this country, namely, the Aimará and the Moxa.[3] About four hundred
thousand people speak these two languages. I am desirous of getting, at
least, one of the Gospels translated into each of these, but have not
yet got any thing done. It is my intention to take a journey through the
interior of Peru; and, when passing through the places where these two
languages are spoken, I shall endeavour to procure the translations when
on the spot.

Thus, you see, the Lord’s work goes forward, even in this remote corner.
South America has hitherto been a neglected and benighted country; but
thanks be to God, this long night of darkness is now far spent, and the
day is at hand. From the time I set my foot on board on my voyage to
South America, I have considered myself as an American. Ever since that
day the interests of America are the uppermost in my heart. You too,
my dear Sir, and the members of your Society, are Americans. I would,
therefore, call upon you, as my fellow-citizens, and would rouse you up
to the mighty importance of that sacred work in which you are engaged.
America, North and South, is the field for your operations. Lo! the poor
Indian, begging from you the “bread of life.” Can you shut up your bowels
of compassion?—“Come over and help us,” breaks upon our ears from every
quarter. Surely this is not the time to sit down with folded hands, to
rejoice in what has been accomplished. No. It is the time to blush, and
to be ashamed for our past supineness: it is the time for calling forth
all our energy, for plying every nerve, in order to make the Light of
Life shine from one end of the earth to the other.

[3] Although I resided upwards of two years in Peru, yet during that time
I did not meet with any person qualified to translate the Scriptures into
either of these two languages. But after leaving that country, I met
with a person fitted for translating into the Aimará, in a place where
I little expected to find one. In London, last year, when in one of the
Paddington coaches, I perceived that one of my fellow passengers was a
foreigner, from his countenance and manner of speaking. After we had
conversed a little with each other, I took the liberty to ask him from
what part of the world he came. He told me he was from South America; and
upon inquiring more particularly, I found he was a native of La Paz, in
Peru, the very spot where the Aimará language is spoken. This individual
I found to be perfectly acquainted with this language, having spoken
it from his infancy; and from his education and other circumstances, I
conceived him to be a suitable person for translating the Scriptures into
that language. Our acquaintance increased, and led to his being engaged
by the British and Foreign Bible Society to translate the New Testament
into his native tongue; and he has now nearly completed this work.

We call a meeting of this kind accidental, and it was truly so, in the
common sense of the term. But the Christian looks higher, and finds the
directing hand of God in such matters. What adds to the interest of this
circumstance is, that besides the person mentioned, there is not an
individual in England who understands a word of the language referred to.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                              _Lima, 1st December, 1823._

I mentioned to you in my last, that Bolivar had safely arrived in this
city. Some days after his arrival, I was introduced to him, and was very
favourably received. He is, in appearance, a very modest unassuming man,
as far as I can judge from the short conversation we had together. He
appears very active and intelligent, but I could not read any thing of
an extraordinary nature in his countenance. He has not the eye of San
Martin, whose glance would pierce you through in a moment. Bolivar’s
weather-beaten face tells you that he has not been idle. No man, I
believe, has borne so much of the burden, or has toiled so hard in the
heat of the day, in the cause of South American Independence, as Bolivar.
His labours in his own country are already crowned with nearly complete
success; Colombia may be considered free and independent. According to
all the accounts which reach us, the Congress of that country is going
on with great steadiness. The following, I conceive, is a very pleasing
trait in Bolivar’s character. When invited to come here, he replied, that
he would very gladly come without a moment’s delay, but that he could
not allow himself to obey his feelings in the matter, as an article of
the constitution of Colombia prohibits the President from going out of
the state without leave from the Congress. From this circumstance, he
said, and from a desire to give an example of subjection to the laws,
he could not come until he should obtain leave. He accordingly wrote
to the Congress for permission, and although, from the distance of the
capital, he was long in receiving an answer, and in the interval was
urgently solicited from this quarter, yet he remained in Guayaquil until
the permission from the Congress came, and immediately after sailed
for this place. Since his arrival here, he has been chiefly occupied
in military occupations, and in endeavouring to make an accommodation
between the Congress and Riva Aguera. Every thing has been done by him
in this matter, and I am sorry to say without effect. The last remedy
only remains, and it has been resorted to; Bolivar in person and 6,000
men have gone against him. I am told he is pretty confident of reducing
him in a very short time, and that he expects to return in three or four
weeks.

Lima is no longer that city of wealth it formerly was. The number of
people who have been reduced from tolerably comfortable circumstances to
poverty, is not a few. The affairs of our school suffer greatly from the
present state of this place. The Government is very friendly towards us,
and very desirous of giving us succour, but they cannot do all they wish,
as this war rivets the attention of all, and devours all the resources.
But the Lord reigneth, and all shall yet be well.

The Congress has, for some months past, been busily occupied in framing
a constitution for Peru, and which they have now brought to a close. A
few days ago it was published, and it has since been sworn to with great
formality by the members of Congress, the Members of Government, and
other public functionaries. It is very probable that this constitution
will be translated into English, and published in London. You will, in
that case, have an opportunity of seeing it, and of forming your opinion
regarding its merits. When you have passed your judgment upon it, I shall
be obliged to you to state particularly what that judgment is, in order
that I may inform my friends here of the result. In this manner you may
perhaps contribute to its improvement afterwards, as the opinions of
foreigners upon the subject will, I am persuaded, have some weight. To
find a perfect constitution would be as difficult, perhaps, as to find
a perfect man. The political constitutions of most countries might be
altered for the better, I believe, especially on your side of the world.
There is certainly a striking difference between the old world and the
new in reference to these matters. You Europeans, generally speaking, may
be compared to an old man, whose evil habits have grown up with him from
the days of his ignorance and foolishness, but which he either cannot
see, or seeing, is unwilling to correct. If you point out these to him,
he gets impatient and angry, and then draws his sword, by dint of which
he convinces you that he is in the right. We, on the other hand, who live
in a new world, have new ideas, and, I may add, true ideas, upon these
subjects. America may be compared to a young man just come of age, and
inexperienced, but who is endeavouring to learn wisdom from seeing the
stubbornness of old age on the one hand, and from the true principles of
philosophy on the other. We are not fettered down by old habits, and we
are endeavouring therefore, and I think with some success to look upon
the subject of government philosophically, and as free as may be from
the influence of prejudice. The single object, I believe, of the rising
states of South America is the forming such laws or constitutions as may
truly secure the liberty and protection of every member of the political
body, to the greatest degree possible. Political codes have been drawn
up with this view, and all of them, I believe, have an article of great
importance, namely, that the constitution shall be revised and improved
from time to time, in order that it may move on towards perfection, as
science and wisdom increase in the world. You will be saying to yourself,
perhaps, that I am too favourable to my new friends, and you will be
ready to produce against me the article upon religion as found in most
of the constitutions of this southern continent. You are likely, I
believe, to form an improper judgment of this country in reference to
that article. You may be sure I feel the want upon this matter more
than you do, but I endeavour to look upon the subject with as little
prejudice as possible. When toleration was obtained in England, it was
wrung from the government, I may say, by main force. The safety of the
state demanded it, and this I suppose had more weight in obtaining for
us this precious blessing, than any qualms of conscience or political
wisdom. Things are quite different here. There is nobody, I may say, who
needs toleration, and of course nobody is asking it for himself. I speak
of the inhabitants of America, exclusive of the few foreigners who reside
in it. One of the members of Congress, at the time of discussing this
subject, very pertinently said, “Why such ado about toleration? Who is
asking for it? or who stands in need of it? We, ourselves, do not need
any such thing, and foreigners, who are here, seem very little concerned
about the subject. It was not religion that brought them to this country,
but commerce. Give them money, therefore, in exchange for their goods,
and they will seek nothing else.” Now all this was very true, however
unpalatable. Yet, notwithstanding the real state of the country in regard
to the need of toleration, a very strong party exists in the Congress in
favour of it; so strong indeed, that it was thought at one time that it
would be gained; and when it was lost, a considerable number entered
their protest upon the subject; the first of whom was an aged priest,
and the head of the principal college in Lima. Now can you tell me when
such things took place in any other country, and originating wholly from
a philosophical view of the matter? Having seen these things take place,
under my own eye, and having conversed with several members of Congress
and others upon the subject, I feel confident in stating, that liberal
views upon it are pretty general, at least in this city, and I believe
that this evil will be removed from the Constitution ere long, perhaps at
the first revival of it.

P.S.—Riva Aguera and his friends, are now prisoners, and his troops have
returned to their duty.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                 _Lima, 1st March, 1824._

I stated to you, some time ago, my expectation of being able to introduce
the New Testament undisguised into our school. Blessed be God, that
object is now accomplished. I have sold several copies to the children
publicly in the school. In the usual course of our lessons, we have
occasion to speak of several incidents in the Gospel history. On these
occasions, I desire our pupils, particularly on Saturdays, to find out
in their New Testaments where such a thing is spoken of, giving them
certain limits. On the Monday following, a number are well prepared
with their New Testaments marked with slips of paper at the places in
question, and often through their pretty impatience to communicate their
discoveries, they tell me before we get into the school, that they have
found out the parable of the sower, the conversion of Paul, &c. You may
easily imagine that these circumstances are great sources of enjoyment
to me, and make up for many disadvantages. I have said that we have got
the New Testament introduced into our school _undisguised_. You probably
perceive what I mean by using the word undisguised. The truth is, the
New Testament, in one sense, has all along been used in our schools in
South America, not however in the open manner we now use it in Lima,
but, as I may say, disguised; that is, we have used for lessons extracts
from it, printed on large sheets, and in little books, thus introducing
the Scriptures as it were by stealth. Each part of these lessons I cause
to be read repeatedly in the classes, until the children can read them
readily. By the time they can do so, the substance of what they have
read, and the instruction contained in it, is tolerably imprinted on the
memory. Children, you know, have a habit of repeating to themselves what
they have been saying or reading frequently. In consequence of this, what
portions of Scripture they have read in the school, they repeat in this
way at home. My excellent friend and companion, the clergyman, already
well known to you, informs me that several of the parents of our scholars
tell him that their children are talking about the Gospel at home all the
day long. From other quarters I have heard the same thing, and always
with satisfaction expressed on the part of the parents. Some of the
elder boys, at times, have requested me to lend them the little books
of Scripture extracts, that they might read them at home; and sometimes
the request is, “My mother desired me to ask you for one of the little
books, as she wishes to read it.” These requests have been listened to
with satisfaction, and you may be sure, complied with. Seeing this good
disposition in regard to this matter, and considering the advantages
which might flow from this silent unpresuming introduction of the Holy
Scriptures, I intimated to the children that the little books would be
sold to them at a small expense, and the consequence was, that many of
them were bought immediately. I mentioned to my clerical friend what I
had done, and my motive for doing it, namely, that the children and the
parents might be improved. He replied, the books must prove useful to
both parents and children, as what they contain is _the word of God_.

You will, perhaps, think I am lengthening out this subject too much,
in talking of our school affairs. It is a subject, however, of some
interest, considering where our school is, and I am persuaded you will
look upon it as such. I shall, therefore, proceed a little farther, even
at the risk of being tedious. We have, at certain times, an exercise for
the more advanced boys, which I conceive to be very useful, and in which
they take a great deal of interest. A Scripture narrative, or parable,
is proposed, which they are required to read over, by themselves, with
great attention, and to note in their memory all the circumstances and
instruction contained in it. Thus prepared, as many as _choose_ to
exhibit, sit down on a form by themselves, and one after another stands
forward, without book, and delivers the parable or narrative, not in the
very words of the text, but giving all the circumstances of the parable
in their own artless way. It is pleasing, and not uninstructive, to hear
them go over their exercise in this manner. Instead, for instance, of
saying that the servant in Matthew, chap. 18, owed his Lord ten thousand
talents, one will say, he owed him a thousand dollars, another, perhaps,
will say a hundred dollars; whilst, on the other hand, they will say
that the one servant owed the other “_unos pocos cuartillitos_,” or, as
we would say in English, a few halfpence. By this way of saying it, they
get into the sense of the passage themselves, and it is thus also brought
down to the level of the understandings of their younger companions, all
of whom are listening, whilst the attention of many is rivetted. One of
the boys the other day, in noticing the concluding verse of the 18th of
Matthew, made a very beautiful allusion to the corresponding petition
in the Lord’s Prayer, forgive us our trespasses as we forgive others. A
premium of two rials (equal to a shilling) was awarded to the boy who
delivered his parable in the best manner. Several times this reward was
proposed and given. One day they asked me what parable we should have. I
told them I was not sure that we should have any at all that day, because
money was very scarce with us, and I did not know if we could spare two
rials. But, said they, we may say the parable, although there be no
premium. You take a pleasure then, said I, in this exercise, do you,
independently of the premium? Yes, said they, with one accord. Well, I
continued, it gives me great pleasure to see you take so much interest in
this matter, and I can assure you, it is a very useful exercise, as well
as a pleasing one.

I now go on to notice what has occurred here since my last, in reference
to supplies of the Holy Scriptures, and their distribution. I stated
to you formerly, that we were entirely without a supply of the Spanish
_Bible_ here, and that we had but a few New Testaments. In hopes of
obtaining some Bibles which were much sought after, I wrote to a
gentleman in Valparaiso, to whom some Bibles and Testaments had been
consigned some time before by the British and Foreign Bible Society, with
an intimation that they should be at my disposal, if I wished for them.
On learning this, I immediately wrote to Valparaiso upon the subject,
requesting the whole to be sent me without delay. After more than the
time necessary for their arrival had passed by without their appearing,
I wrote a second time, making the same request. I received an answer to
my second letter, as it seems the first had miscarried, but I was sorry
to learn that the Bibles were all gone. When I say I am sorry for this,
I speak rather in reference to the supplying of this place, than in
reference to the grand object of distributing the Scriptures in South
America. These Bibles, to the amount of 200, were all distributed, and
mostly by sale, in Valparaiso, so that, if I am sorry in not being able
to supply those who want here, I am, on the other hand, glad that my
friends in Chile have obtained so many copies of the sacred word in their
own tongue.

After the accounts which I have now given you, which are of an
encouraging nature, I am sorry in being under the necessity of giving
a gloomy close to my letter. The Spanish army entered this city
yesterday. I feel as if I were no longer in South America, but as
_transported_ to Spain; and as one in the visions of the night, finds
himself in foreign climes, he knows not how, and sighs to return home,
so do I sigh to return to South America. My next letter may, perhaps,
inform you, that our school has been shut up, and that I have taken my
departure for—heaven knows where. There, however, I shall be, as now,
affectionately yours.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                  _Lima, 3d March, 1824._

Soon after the arrival of the Bibles here, there were many observations
made regarding the faithfulness of this reprint from the Madrid edition;
and many observations were made also as to the reading the Scriptures
without notes, for the Spanish Bible had never been seen before without
these in this country. On one of these occasions, in the street one
day, when a priest was speaking freely to some people about him against
reading the Scriptures without the notes, a friar came up and joined
them; and, hearing the observations of the other against reading, the
Bible without notes, he took up the other side of the question, and
by strong arguments and some wit, he put his adversary to shame, and
convinced those who were present that it was the best and most natural
way to read the divine instructions just as they proceeded out of the
mouth of him who spoke as never man spoke, and just as they flowed from
the pens of the inspired messengers.

I have very great satisfaction in stating, that many of the clergy in
this place encourage the reading of the word of God. This is a cheering
circumstance, and affords good grounds to expect a large diffusion of
divine knowledge; for the word of God cannot return unto him void, but
will accomplish his gracious will in the instruction and salvation of
mankind wherever it is read. I have leaned this friendly disposition of
the clergy upon this subject more particularly, since I set agoing the
translation of the New Testament into the Quichua language, as mentioned
in my last. All with whom I have talked upon this subject, both clergy
and laity, are pleased with the object, and I have not yet heard of any
one condemning the doing of it.

I spoke to a canon, in this place, some time ago upon the subject, and
he voluntarily offered to correct the proof-sheets in passing through
the press, if I should be at any loss for one to do it. Blessed be God
for this encouragement. May he carry on and prosper this work, and make
it a blessing unto thousands. In about three months, or less, I expect
the whole of the New Testament will be translated into the Peruvian
tongue. The revision also is going forward, and from the character and
qualifications of those who are revising it, I trust the translation will
be very faithful, and at the same time adapted to the capacities of the
poor, to whom, in an especial manner, the gospel is preached.

You will observe by my former letter, that besides the Quichua, there
are two other languages spoken in Peru, into which it would be desirable
to get a part or the whole of the New Testament translated. I mentioned
to you my application to the British and Foreign Bible Society for means
to carry forward these translations. I also hinted that this is properly
an _American_ work, and that it would not be unnatural to look for some
assistance in it to the American Bible Society. Will you therefore have
the goodness to lay this matter before the board of managers, and
request them to favour me with a communication upon the subject, as
early as convenience will permit. The object is, to translate the whole
Scriptures into the Quichua language, spoken by upwards of a million, and
also into the Aimará and Moxa languages, spoken each by upwards of two
hundred thousand souls. I add no more upon this subject for the present,
but at the same time, think it not improper to hint, that I shall
probably have another claim upon your liberality, in regard to the native
languages of Mexico. This claim may come before you perhaps some twelve
months hence, should our heavenly Father be pleased to uphold me so long.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                _Lima, 25th March, 1824._

My last letter to Mr. S. closed with a foreboding in regard to our
concerns here, from the circumstance of the Spanish army having entered
this city. On the 29th of February, the Spanish troops, to the amount of
about 2,500, took quiet possession of this place, there being not the
smallest opposition. The patriot troop had retired a few days before,
leaving us altogether unprotected, and exposed to those depredations
which never fail to take place in a large city where there is no
government to restrain. We were, in fact, in a very unpleasant state
for some days, and the first sound of martial music from the Spanish
army filled me with thanksgiving, as a deliverance from the anarchy and
confusion we had lived in for some time.

A few days after the arrival of the Spanish army, and as soon as things
were a little tranquillized, I wrote to the Spanish General, in reference
to our school, telling him what we had done, and the state in which
we were at the time. I represented to him the nature of our schools,
and stated that establishments of a similar kind had been introduced
and encouraged in various parts of the world. I of course mentioned
particularly what had been done in Spain. After stating these things, I
requested him to inform me whether we should go on, or whether we should
immediately shut up our school. In answer to this, I received from him
a very polite letter, saying, that he was informed and fully persuaded
that the school under my direction was a very useful establishment, and
that he wished it to go on until the Viceroy should communicate his
mind upon the subject. In my letter to the General I inclosed a copy
of a letter, which I intended to forward to the Viceroy, and requested
his opinion of the letter, and whether I should send it on to Cuzco. He
replied, that he thought the letter was suitable, and that if I wished
he would himself forward it to the Viceroy, in order that it might go
with greater security. You may be sure, I thankfully accepted his offer,
and sent him immediately my letter to forward. Next day I called on the
General to thank him for his kindness in protecting our school, and in
taking the trouble of forwarding my letter to the Viceroy. I was very
kindly received by him, and encouraged to go on. Thus, you see we have a
new instance of the gracious goodness of our God in giving me favour with
the Governors of this quarter of the world, however much opposed to each
other.

I informed you, I think, soon after my arrival in this place, that the
government had ordered the college belonging to the Dominican Friars
in this city to be put at my disposal, for the use of our school
establishment. The removal of the Friars, and the giving up of the
college, was accomplished without the smallest murmur, or at least
audible murmur, on the part of the monks. This college is an extensive
building, and very well adapted to the purposes of a central school.
We have a large school room, which will hold very conveniently 300
children, and another large room connected with it, which would contain
200 more. We have also several other rooms, very suitable as lodgings for
the masters whilst studying the system, and there is convenience for a
printing office, &c. &c. The apartments formerly occupied by the Rector
of the college, have formed my own lodging the greater part of the time
I have been in Lima. Besides the places now mentioned, which are all
connected with each other, we have a large hall, finely adapted for a
female school, with rooms for the mistress and her assistants. These are
entirely separated from the parts mentioned before, so that though in the
same building, they are quite distinct places, with separate entrances
a gun-shot from each other. Our boys’ school contains, at the present
time, 230 children, and we have often been talking of commencing a girls’
school as a thing greatly wanted in this place. But such has been the
unhappy state of public affairs here for so long a time, that nothing
has yet been done in it. From the description I have given you of the
building we occupy, and the use to which it was formerly destined, you
might naturally expect that the Friars gave it up reluctantly, though
without complaining, and that they would still have their eye upon it,
if a favourable opportunity should present itself for reclaiming it.
I am told, that when the Spaniards were in possession of this city in
June last, the Friars had resolved on petitioning the government upon
the subject, but the short occupation of the city by the Spanish troops
did not allow them to carry their purpose into effect. At the present
time, the Spaniards seem to have taken a more permanent possession of
the place, with the intention of continuing in it for some time, and
their possessing the fortresses of Callao will enable them to do so.
We were, therefore, in greater danger than ever of losing our college,
and indeed application, as I am informed, was actually made to that
effect to General Monet, the commander of the division in this quarter.
But from what I have stated above, you will see the happy resolution
of the General in our favour. I should have mentioned, when describing
the college, that there is a church connected with it, as there is with
all the colleges here. The church and the court connected with it, are
separated by a wall from the parts formerly mentioned. They were formerly
not entirely separated from each other, as there were two openings, like
gate ways, between the two places. These, however, I caused to be built
up, as I did not know what kind of companions I might have in the two
Friars who were left to perform the service of the church; and from the
character of some of this class, and the circumstance of the loss of
their college, and its being put into the hands of a Protestant, I did
not augur much good from their neighbourhood. We have, however, lived
all along on good terms, and our longer acquaintance with each other has
grown, I think, into friendship. I met with a proof of this friendship
since the entrance of the Spaniards, which I did not expect. The Friar
who has the principal charge called upon me one morning, and informed me
that he had heard that the Conde de Villar de Fuente was to be appointed
Governor of Lima. Now, says he, although he is a very good man, yet being
very friendly to the Friars, it is very likely they will press him hard
to regain their college. You should therefore, continued he, endeavour
to see the Governor as early as possible, lest they get the start of
you to your disadvantage. I thanked him very kindly for his intimation
and for his advice, and told him that I was very happy in having this
proof of our living in such friendship with each other. I called upon
the Governor soon after his appointment, agreeably to the advice of my
friend, and found him very well disposed to continue our establishment
and to encourage it.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                _Lima, 29th March, 1824._

The Grecian which brought your letter of 24th April, and the cases of
New Testaments therein mentioned, arrived at the port of Callao at a
very unfavourable time. The garrison in the castles of that place had
mutinied some ten days previous to her arrival, and every thing there
was in confusion. The fortresses and town of Callao were in the hands
of the Spaniards, whilst the patriots governed in Lima. Under these
circumstances, I thought it most prudent not to land the New Testaments,
but to wait some time to see what turn things would take, and for the
same reason I deferred writing you. On the 29th ultimo, the Spaniards
took possession of this city; they have continued here since, and seem
likely to do so for some time. From various circumstances, we have been
led to believe that the Spanish government will not allow those freedoms
which the Patriot government allowed, in reference to the introduction
of books, &c. In consequence of this, I still considered it hazardous
to land the New Testaments, and therefore kept them on board so long as
the Grecian continued here; and when she sailed for Chile, which she
did a few days ago, I got them put on board his Majesty’s ship Fly, now
lying in Callao. I shall thus keep them afloat until I see something
like a certainty of landing them safely. What I have just said refers
only to the 2,500 copies addressed to the care of Mr. Thwaites, as the
rest which were addressed to Mr. Lynch have been carried back to Chile
in the Grecian, and are to be delivered there according to instructions
given. After being landed in Valparaiso, they will be forwarded to
Santiago, the capital, and put into the hands of Mr. Christopher Collis
for sale. I have offered the whole to Mr. Collis at 850 dollars, to be
paid in one month after receiving them; or should he decline taking them
at the rate mentioned, I have desired him to sell them on my account,
charging the commission he usually takes. The price I have put upon the
New Testaments, when sold one by one, is eight rials each, and when sold
in quantities to sell again, at six rials each. This you see will about
cover the original cost and expenses if the whole are taken by Mr.
Collis, and if he retails them they will bring something more. I think
this is a rule that should pretty generally be attended to, and as few
as possible given gratis. What I have said, applies to these countries
of South America, but other rules may be better elsewhere. I do think it
injurious to make a general distribution gratis. Individual copies may be
given in this way by a time, but it should be only at times, and when a
clear case presents itself. The committee will correct me in this if I am
wrong.

On the very day that I received the 610 New Testaments from Valparaiso,
I received a letter from Truxillo begging most earnestly, and “for God’s
sake” that I would send to that place without delay a supply of the
Holy Scriptures. With the writer I am well acquainted, and we had many
pleasing interviews during the few weeks I remained in that place, in
June and July of last year. My friend and correspondent in Truxillo is
a medical gentleman and a native of Ireland. He has been long in this
quarter of the world, and may be considered rather as a South American,
than a native of the British Isles. He is of the Roman Catholic religion,
but is free from those prejudices to be found among many of his own
communion. He studies the word of God himself, and recommends the study
of it most earnestly to all his friends around him. I found him with a
single Spanish New Testament of one of your earlier editions. This was to
him quite a family piece, and his wife and children take great pleasure
in reading it. A copy of the whole Bible in the Spanish language he had
not been able to procure at that time, but in the letter referred to,
he tells me he had obtained one from a friend who purchased it in Lima
at the time of Mr. Lynch’s sale. When we were together in Truxillo, I
inculcated upon him strongly the importance of doing every thing in his
power to make the Word of God have free course and be glorified as far
as in him lay. To this he most cheerfully agreed, and indeed was more
ready to enter into it than I could be to lay it before him. He told me
that he was personally acquainted with most of the rectors in the various
districts throughout the extensive province of Truxillo, which contains a
population of about 300,000 souls. To each of these rectors he promised
to write upon the subject, and was pretty confident that they would,
in answer to his letters, request large supplies of the Scriptures. I
promised on my part to supply him amply with New Testaments very soon,
and with Bibles as soon as I could have a supply from England. Upon my
return to Lima, I sent him 50 Spanish New Testaments, some of the Annual
Reports of the Society, some religious tracts, &c. These were sent
under the particular care of a mutual friend, who sailed for Santa, and
intended to send them overland to Truxillo. This happened to be at the
time of one of our civil commotions, and when our friend landed at Santa
all communication was interrupted between that and Truxillo. From Santa
he sailed to Guayaquil, and not finding a convenient opportunity for
sending them back to Truxillo, he sold them there, and wrote our friend
to that effect, saying he would account to me for the price of them.
This was a great disappointment to Mr. O’Donovan, for that is the name
of our fellow-labourer; and to remedy it, he wrote me the letter above
mentioned. He urges his claim from the circumstance of the great need
there is of the Word of God in that quarter, from his having promised to
send copies to his friends, the rectors, agreeably to what was before
stated, and from the circumstance of a number of copies of two infidel
books which had been just landed from a French ship in that place, and
which have done much evil in these countries. Often do I think, my dear
Sir, and often do I say, that this is a most critical time for South
America, in a religious point of view.

Two days after having received his letter, I sent him off 250 copies,
in common binding, and ten in calf extra. The patience, however, of our
friend has again been put to the trial, for notwithstanding that the
box containing this supply was sent down to Callao immediately, yet on
account of the confusion in that place, as above mentioned, it only went
off a few days ago. I imagine him just now opening it, and satiating his
eyes with its sacred contents. In the conclusion of his letter, he says
he intends to go from house to house to urge these “ignorant but docile
Christians” to receive the treasure offered them. Let us pray that his
benevolent and zealous efforts may be crowned with happy success.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                _Lima, 30th March, 1824._

We have at present three masters learning our system, and whom we
expected to place in other schools before now; but this war literally
devours up every thing, and ties us down to a spot. When we shall clap
our wings and fly over the Andes, to teach the poor Peruvian in his
native tongue, I cannot tell: God may, perhaps, bring this about sooner
than we expect. In the course of a week, the whole of the New Testament
will be translated into the vernacular language of Manco Capac, and by a
descendant of that ancient race of kings.

I have written to the Viceroy La Serna, who resides at present in Cuzco,
requesting to know his determination regarding the continuing of our
system, under his government, in this city, and whether he is desirous of
extending it throughout the country. In something less than two months I
shall probably hear from him, and shall communicate to you the result.
If the answer be favourable, I shall most likely repair immediately to
Cuzco, leaving one of the masters before mentioned in charge of this
school; and should his answer be unfavourable, I shall leave this place
and go northwards.

We have often been very desirous of commencing a girls’ school in this
city, and we have very good accommodations in our college for this
purpose; but we have never been able to effect it, in consequence of the
extreme scarcity of money at present in this city. If Lima had been in
its former state of abundance, we could have effected it with great ease;
and it would have been a very great blessing to this place. We would, in
that case, have been very desirous of receiving a well-qualified teacher
from your Committee, to direct our female department. It would still
be preferable to send two, as one of them could attend to the public
school, and the other might keep a respectable boarding-school for the
higher classes. Regarding this last-mentioned part, several parents have
spoken to me; and on the whole, I think it would turn out well for those
who might come out for that purpose. Such an establishment I am sure
would be the means of doing a great deal of good in this country. Female
education, in my opinion, is the thing most wanted in every country; and
when it shall be properly attended to, the renovation of the world will
go on rapidly. Let us know if you could aid us in these matters, if we
were directly to apply to you. I notice these things that you may write
me upon the subject, and knowing, from experience, how ready you are, at
all times, to listen to every proposition which bears on knowledge and
benevolence.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                _Lima, 12th April, 1824._

You have, more than once, requested me to state to you any interesting
conversations I might have at times with individuals of this country,
upon the subject of religion. I have not, I believe, been very
communicative in my letters to you on this subject. I believe such
details might, in many cases, be interesting, but generally speaking,
the questions and answers upon these matters are so nearly what we might
expect them to be before hand, under the given circumstances, that little
of what can be called solid information is derived therefrom; besides, I
understand you print some of my letters, and there is some delicacy and
caution to be used under such a consideration, more especially as I have
never seen any of your printed accounts, and am thus unable to judge of
the freedom you use in such matters. I hope in your selections for the
press, you will be wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.

I shall now detail to you a conversation which I had a few days ago, with
a particular friend, upon the subject of religion, and more particularly
upon the Catholic and Protestant controversy. The gentleman, with whom
I had the conversation, is a man of superior education and abilities,
and holds an important situation in one of our colleges. We have been
acquainted with each other ever since I arrived in this city. We have
visited each other occasionally during that time, and have talked upon
religious subjects, but almost always upon those things in which we were
agreed. A few days ago I had a visit from him, and we entered almost
immediately into a close conversation or controversy upon some of the
points of the Catholic religion. I had lying on the table one of the
Pope’s bulls, which a young man had brought me a day or two before, as I
had expressed to him a desire to see it. I enquired of my friend, where
I could obtain a set of these bulls, as I wished to see each of them, in
order to ascertain their nature, and what it was they promised to those
who should purchase them. After he had informed me where this article was
to be found, I told him that I understood that those who purchased one of
these bulls at a certain price, namely, eight dollars and a half, were
assured that they would get out of purgatory in two or three days after
death. He said it was so as I had stated. Do you then really believe,
said I, that the Pope can thus pardon the sins of men, and that men can
obtain the pardon of their sins by means of expending such a sum of
money in the purchase of this bull.—He said he believed the forgiveness
of sins could be obtained in the way mentioned, and that the Pope had
such authority in virtue of being the successor of the prince of the
apostles, to whom Jesus Christ had granted the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, and power to remit or to retain the sins of men. It is to be
supposed, however, continued he, that confession of sins is to be made
in order to this forgiveness. And in confession to whom can the penitent
go but to the minister of Christ, in order that they may instruct him
in the nature of repentance? To prevent him from deceiving himself, and
believing he has repented when he has not, it is necessary to show him
what are the signs of a sincere repentance; and when the priest finds the
penitent as he ought to be, then in virtue of the power given by Christ
to his ministers, they absolve him from his sins.—In answer to what he
said, I told him that I considered it to be the duty of man to confess
his sins unto God, as it is with him alone we have to do, and not with
one another; and that the Scripture assures us, that if we humbly and
sincerely confess our sins unto him, and beg forgiveness through the
Lord Jesus Christ, we shall obtain the mercy we ask for. I then said,
that I believed none could forgive sins but God only; and that as to
the power given to the apostle Peter, and also to the other apostles to
forgive the sins of men or to retain them, I conceived it to be a power
of doing this only in a certain way, namely, in the way corresponding
to the instructions which they had received from their divine Master.
I illustrated this by the case of an ambassador sent by his sovereign
with terms of peace to a neighbouring prince. The Ambassador, I said, is
authorized to make peace between the two nations, that is, to put an end
to the war or to continue it. He is not, however, at liberty to do this
in any way he chooses, but only in that way which the instructions of his
sovereign authorize. So was it, I continued, with the ambassadors whom
the Lord Jesus sent into the world; they were sent to proclaim and to
celebrate a peace between God and man, but they were to do so only in one
way, that is, in the way prescribed to them, and of which, I observed, we
shall presently speak. As to the superiority of the Apostle Peter, said
I, to which you refer, or to speak more properly, the superior honour
conferred upon him, it is easy to see in what it consisted, and how far
it extended. To him were promised the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
also the power of remitting and retaining sins; this latter power was
also conferred upon the other Apostles, so that the difference, or the
superior honour conferred upon Peter, consisted in having the keys put
into his hands. Keys are for the unlocking of doors, that a free entrance
may be had to a place inaccessible before the gates were opened. Now,
said I, the Apostle Peter was honoured by his Lord, to open the gates
of the kingdom of heaven, in the first place unto the Jews, and which
he accordingly did in his sermon on the day of Pentecost, and by which
means three thousand entered the church of God at one rush. The same
individual was afterwards honoured _to open the door_ of faith unto the
Gentiles, by a special commission from heaven to that effect. Having
thus opened the gates of the kingdom of heaven unto the Jews, and also
unto the Gentiles, there was no farther use for these keys. The Apostles
of our Lord, in regard to authority in the church, were exactly upon a
level, none was superior and none was inferior. And now, I continued,
with regard to what we were speaking of before, namely, the forgiveness
of sins, I conceive the Apostles could do it only by making known the
message of peace and reconciliation to their fellow sinners, and by
declaring, in the name of their Master, to those who believed their
testimony, the remission of sins consequent upon their belief; and on the
other hand, they retained the sins of men, by declaring unto those who
disbelieved their testimony, that the wrath of God remained upon them.
Further, I said, regarding the successors of the Apostles, I conceived
that strictly speaking they had none, nor were there any required. In
their life time they exercised their authority, and fulfilled their
commission in the way I have stated. And knowing that they were not to
continue long upon the earth, and being desirous that these sacred truths
which they preached into men should always be held in remembrance, they
committed them to writing, and these writings, through the blessing of
God, remain unto this day. The Apostles, therefore, have made their own
writings their successors, and thus, through them, they continue still
to speak to mankind; they still publish the message of reconciliation,
and whose sins soever _they_ remit, they are remitted, and whose soever
sins _they_ retain, they are retained. I remarked a little before, I
continued, that it was at their peril that the Apostles acted in any
other way in the forgiving and retaining of sins, and I now add, that
it is at the peril of men to receive the remission of sins in any other
way than in that which the Apostles taught. The great and eventful day
that awaits us all, will declare on what authority and foundation we have
enjoyed peace in this weighty affair. The precious stones, the gold and
the silver will stand the fire which is to try them, but the wood, the
hay, and the stubble shall be burned up.

When I had finished the observations which I have now mentioned, my
friend took his turn to speak, and stated his mind upon these topics
with great clearness and eloquence to the following effect:—My dear Sir,
in regard to the explanation of the passage on which you have now given
your opinion, and also with regard to the explanation of the Scriptures
in general, I conceive our best and surest plan is to have recourse to
the uniform explanation and judgment of the church. If every one is
at liberty to form his own opinion of the meaning of Scripture, there
will be nearly as many opinions as there are individuals. Witness the
divisions which exist among the Protestants, in consequence of this
liberty which they take of explaining the Scripture, every one as appears
best to him. One believes a certain thing, another denies it, and a third
believes something different from both. Every truth in the Scripture has
thus been defended and opposed, and torn in pieces by this principle,
of every one explaining according to his own judgment and fancy. Under
these circumstances, what a consolation it is to have an authority to
which we can in all cases recur, and in whose decision we can rest
fully satisfied. This authority is _the church_,—which Jesus Christ has
invested with full power on all these points. In consequence of this,
the noble truths of our religion continue as they were in the beginning.
The judgment of the church has never varied upon them as it has done
among the Protestants, neither can it vary. We have the promise of Jesus
Christ that he will be with his church to the end of the world, and that
whatsoever shall be bound by its judgment upon earth, shall be bound also
in heaven, and that whatsoever shall be loosed by it on earth, shall be
loosed in heaven. My dear friend, here is our foundation, here is our
authority and consolation. The Catholic church has continued since the
days of the Apostles and has had an uninterrupted succession of Bishops,
from St. Peter until the present day. The Protestants cannot plead such
a succession. They are but a sect which left the church a century or two
ago, and still occupy a small portion of the world; whereas the Catholic
church, descending from the Apostles, has spread on every side, and its
doctrines have continued pure and uncorrupted from the beginning until
now, yea, and they will continue so until the end of the world, for Jesus
Christ has promised it. Here, my friend, is firm footing, and all else,
be assured, is quicksand and uncertainty. I was born a Catholic, and I
adhere to the religion of my country, and in which I was educated. It is
not, however, from the circumstance of being brought up in this religion
that I now adhere to it. No, Sir, on the contrary, when I came of age I
began to entertain doubts about our religion. Upon this, I set myself to
examine the subject with diligence and attention, and the result was a
thorough persuasion of its firm and unalterable foundation, and of the
beauty and grandeur of the structure. I look upon the Catholic religion,
therefore, with great delight and confidence. It appears to me like a
great and majestic river running through an extensive continent. On one
hand it makes its way, tumbling over rocks, yet uninterrupted in its
course by such impediments; again, it meets in its course with shelves
and dykes, and after being retarded a little by these hindrances it
breaks its way over, and then holds its noble and majestic course until
it reaches the ocean, enriching and beautifying every place through
which it flows. Such is our religion, and I clasp it to my bosom and
esteem it my best and only treasure.

When he had finished, I observed to him, that the plan of the Church
explaining all doubts and difficulties regarding the meaning of every
part of Scripture, and of our resting in that decision, had the
appearance of possessing many advantages. How desirable is it that we
should be able to set our minds at rest on subjects of such importance,
and wherein a mistake or an error might be attended with very serious
consequences. But there appears to me, I said, a great difficulty to be
got over, before we can allow our minds to enjoy the ease and confidence
referred to, by resting in an infallible interpreter. The difficulty
I speak of is this: How shall I know that the church has indeed the
authority you speak of? If I were fully satisfied that the church
possesses this authority, I would, I assure you, fully confide in it.
You remember that, in a former conversation, you promised to prove your
positions regarding the Catholic Church with evidence as satisfactory
as the proof, that the three interior angles of a triangle are equal to
two right angles. Now, I continued to observe, I cannot see evidence for
believing that the church has the power in question, and I cannot receive
it as a doctrine until I be convinced. On what then do you build this
doctrine?

I build this doctrine, said he, in the first place, on the promises of
Jesus Christ to his church, which are these: “whose sins soever ye remit,
they are remitted, and whose soever sins ye retain they are retained;
whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and again, I
will be with you always even unto the end of the world.” In the second
place, said he, from the consideration that the promises of Jesus to
his church, must necessarily have been fulfilled, I maintain that the
church has been guided by the Spirit in the manner I have stated, and in
consequence thereof, she has held the same doctrine from the days of the
Apostles until the present time.

I differ from you, I replied, regarding the meaning and application of
the passages you have quoted from the Scriptures. But as you will have
the church to explain them, and as the church does actually explain them
as you have stated, we cannot therefore meet each other here, on open
ground. Let us then pass on to the other fundamental principle which
you hold, namely, the fulfilling of this promise in the way you have
explained it. How then do you prove to me, that the church has never
varied in her doctrines?—I prove, said he, the constancy and stability
of the church by the uniform voice of ecclesiastical writers, from the
days of the Apostles until now. No sooner did any pastor or bishop broach
any new doctrine, than his own flock, and the whole body of Christians,
every where raised the cry against him. Errors now and then arose,
continued he, and errors too of great consequence, but in this manner
they were publicly reprobated, and the individuals who had erred were
thereby brought to repentance, or else expelled the church.—As I wished
to drive this subject to its proper issue, and to fix upon the very
point upon which we differed, and which point it was necessary to settle
before we could proceed farther with any advantage, I put this question
to him: Do you maintain that the writers upon ecclesiastical affairs,
from the days of the Apostles downward, have all held the same opinions
regarding the interpretation of Scripture? Not exactly so, said he, for
there have been differences among them regarding the interpretation of
several passages of Scripture; and he here instanced several opinions of
St. Augustine, St. Cyprian, &c. But so far, continued he, as respects
what are strictly and properly called the _doctrines_ of the church, I
maintain that there is no difference among them, although in points of
discipline they are not all agreed. You hold then, said I, do you, that
so far as the _doctrines_ of the Roman Catholic church are concerned,
the writers we speak of do not vary? I expected he would here give an
answer at once in the affirmative, but he withdrew a little farther, and
said that he would not affirm to the question I had put, as to _all_
that these writers had said; but so far only, as they had given their
_testimony_ to the doctrines in question as existing among them, he
wished to speak, and not as to their own opinions of these doctrines.
He here stated some _opinions_ of the fathers, and said, that so far as
they acted as _witnesses_ to what existed among them, and in the ages
previous to their time, thus far and no further were their writings to be
considered respecting the argument in hand. I here reminded him by the
way, of what I had before urged, but which he did not concede, namely,
that there were a great variety of opinions among the Catholics as well
as among the Protestants. I stated, at the same time, that I did not
urge this particularly as an objection to their system, but merely as
a counterpart to his objection to the Protestants, arising from their
differences. I then put the question: Do you maintain then, that so far
as ecclesiastical writers have given testimony to the doctrines of the
church, they do not vary, nor can vary?—Yes, said he, I do maintain
that position.—I then replied, I am glad we have come at length to this
one definite point, and I am glad, also, that you have excluded the
opinions of the writers on these subjects, and that you rest solely on
them as witnesses. I now see the point you maintain, and here we will
come to issue. My answer, for the present, shall be short. This position
which you maintain, is a position which I believe to be insupportable,
and which, in consequence, I deny. Here, then, let the subject for the
present rest; we have got a great length in seeing the very line which
divides us, and we have now the matter free of mystery. It is reduced to
a mere historical question. We shall, therefore, decide it as such on
some future occasion, when I shall take in hand to prove that the church
_has varied_.

We have now seen, said I, the very point in which we differ, let us also
see where we agree. I believe, said I, that all mankind are sinners,
and stand in need of a Saviour. I believe that God pitied our race, and
sent his only begotten Son to seek and to save the lost. I believe that
the Lord Jesus Christ is the true Mediator and Saviour of mankind, and
that there is no other name under heaven by which we can be saved. I do
sincerely believe, I continued, in the Lord Jesus Christ as my Lord and
my Redeemer; and, I trust, also that I desire to know all his precepts
and instructions, and to conform my thoughts, and words, and actions
thereunto.—I then said to him, is not this exactly what you believe?—He
said it was so. Well then, I replied, may not we look upon each other as
fellow disciples, and may not we each expect, if we hold on, that the
Lord will give unto us both that crown of righteousness which he hath
promised to them that love him? He here seemed to hesitate, and did not
give a direct reply. You see that I was here touching upon the point
of there being no salvation out of _their_ church.—He said that what I
had stated regarding my faith was well, but that there was something
farther necessary, and upon saying so, he seemed to digress a little,
or, at least, not to speak directly to the point in hand. My dear Sir,
said I, pray let us settle this point. Have the goodness to speak your
mind freely; speak out, what do I still want, what more must I believe,
than what I have stated, in order to obtain eternal life. Did not the
Lord Jesus himself concede eternal life to those who believed what I
have told you in my belief? And did not the Apostles, according to the
power invested in them, remit the sins of those who believed and acted in
the manner I have stated? He then said something about the necessity of
believing the church, in order to salvation.—Can I not look for salvation
without this? said I.—Take care that you do not put obstacles in the way
to heaven, which the God of our salvation has not put. Strait is the
gate, and narrow is the way which leadeth unto life, pray then, do not
with stumbling blocks fill up this narrow way. Let the Lord Jesus and his
Apostles guide us in this, and in all matters that concern the kingdom of
God.

Upon arriving here we found our time was gone, and that we had been
upwards of two hours in a very close conversation. As my friend could
stop no longer, we broke up our conversation at this point, he still
stating it as necessary to salvation, that I should believe the church.
When we thus dropped our disputation, he arose, and as I accompanied him
out, he threw his arms around me, and said, “We shall yet, I trust, be
united together, and companions in our Lord Jesus Christ.”

I have lengthened my account of this interview, perhaps unnecessarily,
and it may be till I have tired you. By way of excuse, I would say that
I felt real interest in the conversation, and my endeavour has been to
make you participate with me, as I believe what interests and pleases one
of us is not unpleasing, nor without interest, to the other. It often
happens, however, that what interests us in a conversation or narrative
loses its effect upon others by the imperfect way in which we repeat it.
In the present instance, this is very likely the case, but I leave you to
judge.

I have only to remark, before I conclude, that the point in dispute
between us is now reduced to narrow limits; and it was my main endeavour
to bring it to this bearing, nor was he averse to it. He is, as I said
at the outset, a man of good talents, and reasons clearly. I do not
promise to you that we shall be able to set the subject at rest in
our next conference, notwithstanding all the accuracy and honesty of
my good friend. You know there are many things which prevent such an
anticipation. I shall, however, endeavour to prove to him, in the first
place, that the church _at_ Rome, and other churches in the days of
the Apostles, held the doctrines and followed the practices which are
contained in the New Testament. With these doctrines I shall then compare
the doctrines of the church of Rome in the present day; and if I can show
a disparity between them, I think impartiality should give the judgment
in my favour, even without entering upon ecclesiastical history; as I
shall thus have proved that the church _has varied_, and hence that those
passages he referred to, must be misinterpreted by Romish writers, and
that they do not apply to their church, whose infallibility must, of
course, fall to the ground, agreeably to the principles stated in the
preceding conversation. Should, however, justice not speak out in my
favour, I shall pass on to show, from ecclesiastical writers, that the
doctrines of the Church of Rome differ in the present day from what they
were in the first and second centuries, and even later. By this means I
hope to arrive at the same conclusion, as in the way before mentioned,
and thus to disprove my friend’s position of the church never having
varied, by the very means by which he maintains it. This I conceive,
is the only way of managing the controversy between the Catholic and
the Protestant. Until you settle this point about the authority of the
church, you can do nothing effectually. If you cite, for instance, a
passage of Scripture to disprove any one of the doctrines of the Catholic
church, you are met immediately with the interpretation which the church
puts upon that passage, and there is an end of it. If you should allege
that the passage plainly and evidently means something very different
from each interpretation, then you are reminded that our judgement is
weak and erring, and that the judgment of the church is infallible. So
that to whatever hand you turn, you never can get out of this circle.
It is therefore necessary to demolish this outwork entirely. What I
have said of course applies chiefly to the mode of reasoning with those
who are thorough-paced in their theological arguments; but with regard
to others, you can attack them in any particular part, and carry your
argument forward on the principles of common sense, and by the doctrines
of Scripture taken in their plain and obvious meaning.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                  _Lima, 1st June, 1824._

In the conclusion of my letter of the 1st of March, I noticed that this
city had been taken possession of by the Spanish army. It is still in
their possession, and there does not appear, at present, any immediate
prospect of a change in this respect. You will not expect from me
political news under present circumstances, and I pass on to note what
little affairs have come under my observation during these two or three
months past, respecting that kingdom which cannot be moved by the strifes
of men, nor the clangour of war.

My letter to Mr. H. of 25th March would inform you of the protection
which the Spanish General granted to our schools. In consequence of that
encouragement, I resolved to remain her some time longer, in order to put
our establishment upon as sure a footing as possible. Nothing material
occurred in our school upon the arrival of the Spaniards, except the
losing of some of our scholars. The cause of this was the dread their
parents were in, lest their children should be seized on their way to
and from the school by the recruiting parties, who not infrequently take
some of the bigger boys as they find them in the street, in order to make
drummers of them. Our number, in consequence of this, is less than it
was about three months ago. In these times, when party spirit runs high,
we endeavour in our school to maintain a strict neutrality in words and
actions. We found some difficulty during the first days, after our change
of rulers, to establish this neutrality among the children themselves.
They would, from time to time, be forming themselves into sides, and
calling each other respectively Patriots and Goths. We have in the
school, children whose parents have taken opposite sides in this contest,
and as might naturally be expected, the children on the one hand and on
the other have imbibed the sentiments of their parents. We succeeded at
length in putting an end to these strifes among the children, and we now
all live in peace and unity. The government holds out to us no immediate
encouragement, and on the other hand, it never in any shape interferes
with our operations. On the whole, this school is going on very well. The
children are making progress in their learning, and advancing in moral
dignity; and some are lisping out, and some are reading with readiness,
the gracious words which proceeded out of the mouth of our blessed
Saviour, as they were taken down by the Holy Spirit. I may add, that we
are not losing the estimation of our friends here, but on the contrary,
if I mistake not, we are gaining more friends in both parties, and making
advances in public confidence.

About three weeks ago I was on the eve of leaving this place, and had,
as on a former occasion, every thing packed up with that intention. I
had indeed resolved to sail for Guayaquil with the first ship, and was
inquiring for a passage. My reasons for doing so were quite solid. My
salary, as I suppose you know, is paid by the government. Under present
circumstances, the payment of the troops is the first thing attended
to, and to procure funds sufficient for this purpose, requires great
exertions in the present exhausted state of this place. To obtain this
supply, all the ordinary sources of revenue are laid hold of, and
pretty heavy contributions also are laid on the inhabitants to make up
deficiencies. This being the case, there was no prospect of my obtaining
any supplies, more especially as persons in the immediate employ of the
government, and who have salaries assigned them, could obtain nothing.
To make certain, however, I made application, and found it impossible
to obtain any thing, on account of the circumstances mentioned. As you
know I have no supplies but what my own hands provide me with, it became
an imperative duty to remove when my usual resources were dried up.
These were my reasons for going, and I suppose you will consider them
sufficient, especially if you take into consideration the high price of
all kinds of provisions in this city. Sugar for instance, which grows
and is manufactured within a few miles of the city, is now selling at
twenty-pence and two shillings the pound.

Being ready for setting off, as above mentioned, and having given notice
to the children to that effect, I waited only till the following day to
send my luggage down to Callao, and to follow it immediately. Whilst I
was thus prepared, my good friend the clergyman, whom I have frequently
mentioned in my former letters, called upon me, and said that he believed
I would not go away yet, notwithstanding all my preparations. I smiled at
what he said, and replied, that my going appeared very certain and very
near too, for I intended to send my luggage to Callao next morning.—Well,
I do not think you will go away for all that, said he.—Upon my asking
him what reasons he had for saying so, he stated, that he had been
speaking with some of the parents of the children, and that they had
expressed to him their concern at my going, and said they would very
willingly contribute what they could, and would speak to some others who
had children in the school, and that they hoped by that means something
might be raised, which might, in a great measure, remove the reasons I
had stated for my going. Whilst my friend and I were talking to this
effect, a person came in who had a son at school, and repeated the same
things. I replied, that I felt very much obliged by the confidence they
reposed in me, and for their friendly interference for my continuance
in this place. I noticed also that I had candidly stated my reasons for
going away at this time, and that though they had kindly proposed a way
of removing these difficulties, yet I felt a delicacy in calling on
the parents of the children on my own behalf. They replied to this by
saying that they would speak to some of their friends upon the subject,
and that in fact they had spoken to some of those of most influence who
were very cordial and anxious in the matter; and my friend the clergyman
proposed to write notes to others of the parents, in his own name, to
remove any delicacies I might have as to the application. Upon seeing
so much interest taken in this matter, I recognized the hand of God
in it, and agreed to their proposal. Their plan has been carried into
effect, and this has the Lord opened, as it were, a window in heaven, and
let down before me a sheet full of supplies. In this same manner, I may
say, has the Lord provided for me during the years of my pilgrimage in
this foreign land. He has set a table before me, he has anointed my head
with oil, he has made my cup to run over. Surely goodness and mercy will
follow me all the days of my life, and O may I dwell in the house of the
Lord for ever.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                                 _Lima, 15th July, 1824._

Your very acceptable favour of 6th January last, came safely into my
hands on the 22d ultimo, and I have now the pleasure of writing you a few
lines in reply. Your notice of the progress of Bible Societies in France
is very interesting, and it is not less so what you mention regarding the
circulation of the Holy Scriptures in Egypt, and in Jerusalem, the city
of the great King. To whatever quarter we turn our eyes, we behold the
word of God silently making its way into the hands of men of every nation
and of every language, saying unto all, Fear God, and give glory to his
name, for the day of his merciful visitation is come. The strains of the
Bible Society remind us of the song of the heavenly messengers upon their
announcing the Advent of our great Deliverer. The language of both is,
“Glory to God in the highest, and on earth, peace, good will towards men.”

It affords me much satisfaction to observe the interest which the Society
takes on behalf of South America, and I hope the day is coming when we
shall be more sensible of your favours to us, and when we shall join
together in grateful acknowledgment of your godly benevolence. Have the
goodness to convey my sincere thanks to the Committee, for the readiness
with which they have acceded to my request respecting the translating
and printing of a part of the Holy Scriptures into the ancient Peruvian
tongue. I thought I should, by this time, have been able to give you a
very favourable account of the progress of this work, but we are subject
here to sad vicissitudes, for war rages in the land, and of late the
sword has reached unto our very soul. How long we shall be visited with
this scourge I cannot tell. The Judge of all the earth will do right, and
it is our duty to submit to his holy will.

The translation of the whole of the New Testament into the Peruvian
language was finished about two months ago. The Gospel by Luke has been
very carefully revised and corrected by four individuals, one of whom
is a Clergyman, another is a Theological Tutor in one of the colleges
of this city, and the other two are of the medical profession. These
four, along with the gentleman who made the translation, went over this
gospel verse by verse, with great care. The present corrected version,
therefore, is the joint work of _five_ persons, and I trust it may be
relied on with some confidence. It has not yet been put to the press,
for we have not had a printing press in Lima during these four months
past. There are two indifferent ones in Callao, one of them in the castle
and the other under its guns, but I have not yet been able to ascertain,
since I received your letter, whether any thing can be done at these or
not. In my next I shall inform you more particularly upon this subject,
and if the printing shall be then begun, I shall forward you a copy of
the first sheet.

In my letter to Mr. Ronneberg of 29th March last, I noticed the safe
arrival of the Grecian in Callao, bringing the 2,500 Spanish New
Testaments addressed to me, and the 1,592 addressed to Mr. Lynch. Of the
six boxes which came to me, I have sent two to Guatemala by a favourable
opportunity which offered. I have also sent one to Arequipa, and one to
Truxillo, and two yet remain on hand. A few weeks ago I received from
Captain Robson, of the Sesostris, two boxes of New Testaments, (Paris
edition,) containing about 500 each. These he received, I believe, from
the Merchants’ Bible Society, or from some other of the Societies in
London.

In the letter already referred to, I noticed what had taken place with
regard to 50 New Testaments, which I sent to Truxillo some time ago. I
mentioned the impossibility of getting them conveyed to Truxillo under
the circumstances then existing in that place, and that in consequence
they were carried to Guayaquil. I have since received a very pleasing
letter regarding their reception in that place, of which the following is
an extract.

“It is with the utmost pleasure I sit down to write these few lines to
you, to inform you of the hunger and thirst after the word of God in
this part of the world. You may remember, that when I last left Lima you
gave me a box containing Tracts and Testaments, for Dr. O’Donovan in
Truxillo, but from the then existing state of the country it was out of
my power to forward the above mentioned box to Truxillo, and as we were
not allowed to enter that port, we were consequently obliged to proceed
to Guayaquil. I wrote you from that place, saying, that I was bound for
the coast of Mexico, but as affairs would not permit it, I made a trading
voyage to Jipijapi, Monte Cristi, and the Bay of Caracas. But before
leaving Guayaquil some one got knowledge of my having these Testaments,
and the demand was so great, that it was almost out of my power to save
any of them, although it was my intention to do so, for the other above
mentioned parts; and as I had no likely opportunity of forwarding them
to Mr. O’Donovan, I thought it best to circulate them, and not to let
such a treasure lie hid in darkness; and I am convinced that it is in
general considered as a treasure; for with pleasure have I seen, in
passing through the streets of Guayaquil, not once or twice, but mostly
every day, the shopkeepers, and the poor people who have stalls, read in
the blessed Gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. If I had had ten
times as many, I am persuaded I could have sold them all. On my arrival
in this port, (Monte Cristi, latitude 3° south) I had no Testaments, but
a few tracts, and some of the instructions of the Lancasterian system of
teaching; I gave the latter to different school-masters, and likewise a
few tracts along with them. A day or two after it was known that I had
tracts on board, it was astonishing, but at the same time pleasing, to
see both old and young coming after me in the street, and to where I
lived, requesting me either to sell or give them one of each kind. There
was one tract in particular, which, to my knowledge, was sent twenty
leagues to a curate, an acquaintance of mine, and on my going to some of
the inland towns, which I had occasion at times to do, there was always
particular inquiry for Tracts and New Testaments. I had once, about four
years ago, distributed a few Testaments in Monte Cristi, one or two of
which I saw this time. Such is the thirst after the word of God, that the
Governor and two or three more, requested me as a particular favour,
that I would leave a New Testament I had for my own use, until I should
return, and begged and even offered money, so that I would bring either
the New Testament or the whole Bible on my return. The Governor, after
reading the rules of the Lancasterian plan of teaching, gave orders in my
presence to some of the school-masters to conform to some of the rules
as near as they could. He seems to be a young man very much inclined to
forward any thing that tends to promote the education of youth. At this
moment I am surrounded with children requesting tracts, but as my stock
is small, I am very particular to whom I give them, making every one read
a sentence or two before they get a tract.—It gives me infinite pleasure
to be thus employed in distributing the word of God to those that hunger
and thirst after righteousness; and after the fatigues of the day, I feel
refreshed to be thus employed.”

The information contained in the above extract is very interesting, and
I trust many other instances will be witnessed upon this continent, of a
sincere desire to possess, and to read the Holy Scriptures. I shall take
care to seize the first opportunity of sending a supply of New Testaments
to Guayaquil and parts adjacent. It often occurs to me that it might
prove very useful to make journeys through various parts of this country,
in order to dispose of the Scriptures to the best advantage, and to the
greatest extent possible. I felt much inclined to employ a person in whom
I have confidence, in such journies, but did not like to do so at your
expense without orders, and my own funds at present cannot afford it.—I
have as yet received no answer to my letter to the Viceroy, and am quite
uncertain as to the time I remain here. I had almost forgot to mention to
you the safe arrival of the parcel containing the Brief View, in Spanish.
Many copies of this have already been circulated, and they have produced
a good effect.

I conclude, my dear Sir, by praying that an abundant measure of the Holy
Spirit may be poured out upon yourself, and upon all your associates.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                             _Lima, 1st September, 1824._

Many feelings, my dear friend, rush upon my mind on the present occasion.
I shall, at once, give you to understand something of the number and the
nature of these, by telling you,—that I have just now shut up my house,
have taken leave of the children and of several warm friends, and go down
immediately to Callao, to embark for Truxillo and Guayaquil; and from the
latter place I intend to go to Bogotá; and thence onward from one place
to another, until perhaps, and if the Lord will, I shall see you face to
face. In consequence of these things, as you may easily suppose, I have
my mind full of past, and of present, and of future objects. I think of
my parting from you more than six years ago; I think of the wonderful way
by which the Lord has preserved me, and led me, and blessed me in this
foreign land; I think of the goodness of God in having allowed me to drop
a seed here and a seed there in this continent, which appears a world
of itself; I think of the affectionate parting I have this day had with
many warm friends, and who are mostly priests, and of their sincere and
earnest entreaties for my speedy return to them; and further, I think of
the prospect of sowing the word of God on my journey,—of the pleasure, if
such be the will of our Saviour, of seeing again all my dear brethren and
friends in England,—of spending a few months with you in endeavours to
forward the cause of our Redeemer in South America; and finally, I think
of parting from you once more, and of returning again to this quarter of
the world, to spend in it the remaining days of my life in seeking its
welfare.

It is time to tell you the immediate cause of these projected movements.
I say the _immediate_ cause, for I suppose you know that these are not
new arrangements. The reason, then, of my setting off at the present time
is, because I conceive it the most favourable time I am likely to have of
reducing these arrangements to practice. You know how the war rages here,
and how it defeats every attempt to forward the education of youth, and
the promoting of general improvement. What I have said applies to Peru in
general, but more particularly to this city, where the sword has truly
reached to the heart. We are here, I may say, in a beseiged city, having
the enemy on all sides. Guerilla parties surround the city by land, and
have several times come in at night, and carried off people and property;
and on the other hand the port of Callao is actually blockaded by the
Peruvian squadron under Admiral Guise. The distress which prevails in
this city, in consequence of every thing being thus at a stand, is _very
great_, and it is augmented by heavy contributions. This, perhaps, in
former times, was, without exception, the richest city in the world,
but _now_, I may say with equal certainty, that it is the poorest. The
luxury and dissipation which prevailed, in consequence of this abundance
of wealth, may be easily imagined; and I have often thought upon that
passage in the 18th chapter of the Revelation, and have seen it applied,
I think, to our case, “How much she hath glorified herself, and lived
deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her.”

Until, therefore, some change take place here, nothing more can be done
than has already been done. Our school goes on, and I may say, with
as much prosperity as could be expected under the circumstances above
mentioned. The number of scholars has decreased from 230 to about 200.
There are two causes for this decrease; the one is, that the bigger boys
are afraid to go out lest they should be taken up by the recruiting
parties; and the other is, the real poverty which exists, and which
prevents many parents from sending their children, as they are unable to
procure them shoes and clothes to enable them to appear decently among
others. Whilst these two causes exist, the number may diminish, perhaps,
still more, but the school will continue to maintain itself, and to
support its character, I expect, in the progress of those who attend.
There are two masters in it, who are well instructed in the plan, and
the whole is under the direction of my good friend, the clergyman, of
whom I have often spoken to you. What I have said applies to the model
or central school. There is also another school in the city on the same
plan, with about eighty scholars, which, I hope, will also continue to go
on well, though subject, of course, to the same disadvantages.

I have thought, then, that I was called upon to seize this time as the
most suitable for visiting other parts of this Continent, and for the
objects I have in England. My principal business upon my journey will be
the circulation of the Scriptures in the different places I may visit,
and I hope that something may be done in this way, so as to make my
journey not unprofitable. Of my progress on my road, and in my objects,
I shall endeavour to inform you from time to time. I shall only farther
observe, in regard to my intentions, that my route, &c. will be a good
deal determined by the circumstances which may occur in the way by which
the Lord may lead me.

These movements have, I trust, been entered upon in the fear of God, and
after mature deliberation, and fervent supplication to the Father of
lights, who has promised to guide in judgment those who seek his face in
sincerity.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                          _Guayaquil, 5th October, 1824._

I arrived in this place a few days ago, and seize the earliest
opportunity to state to you the cause of my being here. You already know
that the single object which I have in view in South America, is the
promoting of the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. There are, of course,
various ways of doing this, and I have thought it best to allow myself
to be guided in the manner of doing it, by the various circumstances and
occasions which the providence of God opens up to me from time to time.
The two things to which I have more particularly given my attention
all along are, the education of youth, and the circulation of the Holy
Scriptures. In regard to the latter, with which you are more immediately
connected, I have stated to the Society, at different times, my desire
of forwarding their work in this quarter, in every way which lies in my
power. I have also informed the Society, on various occasions, as to
the progress of their work in this continent. It has afforded me much
satisfaction to observe the interest taken by you all for supplying South
America with the sacred volume, and to read the repeated assurances you
have communicated to me of your desire to carry forward this object in
the most extensive and effectual way possible. The confidence I reposed
in the Society in regard to this country, induced me to commence the
translation of the New Testament on your account into the Quichua, or
ancient language of Peru, and the answer I received from you some time
ago, has shown me that I was not mistaken in regard to your views.

The same confidence as to the views of the Society, and a hope of being
able to do something in the way of circulating the word of God, in places
not yet visited, or but very partially, by this messenger of peace, has
induced me to come to this city at the present time. It is my intention
to set out from this place in two or three days for Bogotá, the capital
of Colombia. In my way I shall pass through Riobamba, Ambato, Tacunga,
Quito, and Popayan, all of which are populous cities, and where I expect
to sell a considerable number of copies of the Spanish New Testaments.

The present state of the war in Lima renders abortive every attempt to
forward education there, and very little can be done in the circulation
of the Scriptures by sale, on account of the very great pressure of
the war, which has reduced the city to much distress. Under these
circumstances, I thought the best time I could find for visiting the
quarters above mentioned, and perhaps for visiting my native land, was
the present. I set out then from Lima with this intention, and to perform
the part of an agent of the British and Foreign Bible Society. I am not
sure, but I may feel myself under the necessity of petitioning you for my
_travelling expenses_. I never intended to charge you for any services
I might be honoured in doing for your Society, if possible to avoid it;
but the low state of my funds at present, on account of the war here, may
urge me to do what otherwise I should not have done. I mention this at
present, only in case it should be necessary. The prosperous turn the war
has lately taken in Peru, encourages me to hope that what is due to me by
the government of that country will be paid in due time, and in that case
my little services shall cost you nothing.

I left Lima on the 5th ultimo, and at that time the supply of New
Testaments, and of the four books of the Old Testament, printed with
a small type, of which you wrote me, had not arrived. I had anxiously
looked for their arrival for some weeks before my coming away, as by
the date of your letter, I thought there was sufficient time for their
reaching that place. I was very sorry in not having been furnished with
this supply before entering upon my present journey, as I think the
volumes printed with the small type would have been very acceptable, and
the whole Bible also would have been equally so, as it has been often
sought for. I have just one Bible with me to show as I go along, by way
of specimen, in order to incite curiosity, and a desire to possess it,
when it may be supplied to all those places. This copy I bought in Lima
for this express purpose, and hope it will serve the end in view. I have
brought about 800 New Testaments with me, and in this place I have found
the supply you sent by the Grecian to Mr. Lynch, and which I thought had
gone to Chile. I am glad at finding these here, as it enables me to send
a quantity to Guatemala by an opportunity which offers from this place in
a day or two. The rest I will dispose of otherwise. I mentioned to you
some time ago, that I had sent two boxes to Guatemala of those which came
to me by the Grecian. I have however learned, that the vessel in which
they were sent had changed her destination, and that they have not yet
arrived at that place. The accidental finding, in this place, the cases
brought by the Grecian, enables me now to supply this deficiency, and
also to send by the same person a supply to California. As to the boxes
formerly sent, though they did not arrive at the destination intended,
I entertain no doubt of their safety, and of their being profitably
disposed of somewhere, and of which I expect to hear in due time.

I shall now state to you what has occurred in the part of my journey
already performed. The first object I had in view, was to visit Truxillo,
where I expected to find my good friends who take so much interest in
the Peruvian translation of the New Testament, and who had laboured so
diligently to accomplish it. I accordingly embarked on board a vessel
bound for that place, and where I safely arrived in due time. I was sadly
disappointed in not finding my friends there as I expected. Not one of
them was to be found, nor could I ascertain with certainty where they
were, but heard that one had been seen going to one place and another to
another. The suddenness of their leaving Lima prevented us from making
any arrangements about our translation, and we had not even time to bid
each other adieu. The abruptness of our parting, rendered more severe my
disappointment in not finding them in Truxillo, where I intended to make
arrangements with them for carrying forward thin work during my absence.
I had brought from Lima the manuscript of the whole New Testament in the
Quichua language, together with the Gospel of Luke, thoroughly revised
and prepared for the press. I mentioned to you in my last, that I would
endeavour to carry your resolution into effect regarding the printing of
1,000 copies of this revised part. I mentioned also that all the printing
presses had been removed from Lima, but that two were to be found in
Callao, and that I would ascertain whether the work in question could be
done there. Upon enquiry, I found it could not. In consequence of this,
I wished to get the Gospel of Luke printed in Truxillo, and for that end
carried the MS. to that place, that it might be carried through the press
there. And in regard to the MS. of the other parts of the New Testament,
I expected that our friends, in their exile, might go on revising and
correcting it. All these plans, as you see, have been frustrated. I
therefore carefully packed up the whole MS. and addressing it to one of
our translators, gave it into the hands of an English gentleman going
to Lima, to be delivered according to the address, when the expulsion
of the Spaniards from Lima (which is soon expected) would enable our
friends to return. I also wrote a few lines explaining my wish regarding
the revising of the MS., and regarding the printing of the part already
revised. The English gentleman of whom I have spoken, has kindly offered
to advance all the money that may be necessary for carrying this into
effect. From these arrangements I expect that the work will be set agoing
again in the course of two, or at most three months from this date; for
according to the _present_ aspect of the war, the Spaniards will not be
able to continue longer in possession of Lima, although they may, and
probably will, retain the fortresses of Callao till a later period.

Having touched upon this subject of the Spanish cause here, I cannot
forbear mentioning to you the singular interposition of Providence on
behalf of the cause of liberty in this quarter. On the 6th of August
last the two armies came in sight of each other at a place called
Junin, between Pasco and Tarma. The consequence was, that a battle took
place between the cavalry of the two parties. There were 1,200 of the
Spaniards and 800 of the Patriots. An eye witness says, “The concussion
was tremendous, as they came up to each other at full gallop. In a
quarter of an hour, upwards of 400 men lay dead upon the field, more than
three-fourths of whom were Royalists. All this havoc and slaughter was
caused by the lance and sword, principally by the former. Not a shot of
any description, was fired.” In a short time victory begin visibly to
declare for the Spaniards, and the General at the head of the patriot
cavalry was made prisoner. At this critical moment, by some scarcely
explained movement, the Spaniards got somehow into disorder, and began to
give way. This was followed up by the Patriots, and in a very short time
they obtained a complete victory. The whole of the Spanish army was, in
consequence of this defeat, struck with a panic, and by forced marches
endeavoured to get out of the way of the enemy as fast as possible.
Bolivar immediately advanced, and the Spaniards continued to flee before
him with all speed. On the 22d August, only 15 days after the battle, the
advanced guard of the patriot army entered Guamanga. Five of the finest
provinces of Peru thus fell into their hands in the short period of about
a fortnight. The Spanish army has been sadly reduced and dispirited by
their rapid retreat, and the army of Bolivar has increased in numbers and
in strength. I consider this to be _a deadly blow_ to the Spanish cause
in this quarter of the world, from which I think and hope they will never
recover. With this cause will terminate, I trust, the reign of oppression
and violence, of ignorance and fanaticism in Peru, and by which it has
been borne down for these three hundred years. So perish all tyranny and
ignorance from the earth!

I should perhaps beg your pardon for having drawn your attention so long
to the concerns of war and of politics, as you are men of peace and of
no party, and your only occupation is speaking peace to them who are far
off and to them that are nigh. Still, however, you will remember that
the book whose circulation we are engaged in, detains our attention in
many places with the account of wars and revolutions. But you will say
that all these are related there merely from their being connected with
the grand moral and religious revolution of the world through that great
prophet who was to come. This is certainly a right view of the subject;
and motives of a similar nature, I trust, and not party nor malicious
principles, have induced me to detain you a moment upon the wars of this
quarter of the world. I firmly believe that the deliverance of this
country from bondage and oppression, and the mental emancipation of its
inhabitants, depend upon the success of this revolution. The Spaniards,
as is well known, have greatly impeded, not to say prohibited, the
progress of knowledge and of true religion in America. It is not easy
therefore, nor is it proper, to remain indifferent as to the issue of
this struggle.

I now return to our work of peace, and to Truxillo. I wrote the Society
some time ago, of having found a useful and zealous co-labourer in
that city, and that I had forwarded to him from Lima a supply of New
Testaments. At the first he met with some difficulties, owing to the
ecclesiastical authorities of the place. These were at length overcome,
and he was allowed to commence the sale of the Scriptures publicly.
When he had obtained leave to do so, he printed an advertisement, and
posted it up in the public places of the town, intimating the sale. The
consequence was, that he had sold when I was there about 100 copies. He
had also written to his friends the Vicars in the provincial towns, but
he had not then, from the shortness of the time, received the answers
to his letters. When these arrive, he expects several orders for New
Testaments to be sent to the various towns in the department of Truxillo,
which contains a population of upwards of 300,000. In addition to this
mode of circulating the Scriptures, my friend informed me that he was
about to put in practice a method of lending the New Testaments in the
different houses which he is in the habit of visiting, and in others
which he intends to visit for that purpose. Our friend’s medical duties
give him a facility for carrying this into practice. He intends to lend
the New Testament for a day, or for two or three days, as circumstances
may direct, and to call again for it himself at the given time. Upon
calling for it, he says he will ask them if they wish to purchase it, and
if so, he will sell it at a price corresponding to the circumstances of
the individual; and if they do not wish it, he will take it with him and
lend it to some other, to whom in turn he will put the same question,
and thus sell it or take it with him, as circumstances require. You will
easily see that this way of doing will cost him a good deal of labour and
care, but he seems to count nothing of these, if in this manner he may be
the means of circulating the word of God, and of drawing the attention
of the people around him, to its all-important contents. As he makes all
his rounds on horseback, he will, I hope, be enabled fully to verify his
benevolent purpose. He showed me a pair of saddle-bags, which he told me
he had got made for the very purpose of always carrying about with him a
supply of New Testaments. He gave me one hundred dollars to account of
sales, which was rather more than what he had received.

The next thing I have to notice in Truxillo, is, I conceive, of some
importance, and will prove, I trust, the means of greatly extending the
operations and diffusing the blessings of the British and Foreign Bible
Society. What I refer to is, the finding of an additional agent who
takes a lively interest in the diffusion of the Scriptures, and in every
other means by which his countrymen may be benefited. The individual
in question is a clergyman, and a man of rank in that order. He is
Vicar-general to the army, and possesses a considerable influence. His
residence, at present, is at Moche, a little village about four or five
miles from Truxillo, and of which place he is rector. This, however, is
only a temporary residence, during the occupation of his home by the
Spaniards, and from which, in consequence, he was obliged to flee. The
place of his nativity and of his permanent residence is in the province
and near the city of Arequipa, towards the southern extremity of Peru.
It is this circumstance in particular, that will render his services
valuable, as we have already an active agent in Truxillo. He intends to
return to his native province as soon as the course of the war will
permit. Arequipa is in the centre of a populous country, and he will
have an extensive field of operation. Another circumstance renders the
acquisition of this gentleman very valuable, and that is his thorough
knowledge of the Indian or Peruvian language, which is very extensively
spoken in that quarter. To this I add another feature in his character
of yet more importance, which is, his compassion for the oppressed and
degraded state of the indigenous population of Peru, and the lively
interest he takes in ameliorating their condition, by his representations
to the government upon the subject, and by his personal labours. No
individual I have yet met with in these countries, has offered himself
so decidedly and so heartily to promote the cause of your Society, as
this gentleman; and from all the circumstances I have mentioned, you
will see that his good will and his services must be considered a great
acquisition.

I considered the time spent in visiting Truxillo abundantly recompensed
in meeting with this fellow-labourer, and I found, in this circumstance,
some relief from the disappointment I had met with in not finding there
the friends I had expected. My falling in too with that individual was
perfectly accidental, for I had no knowledge of such a one being in that
place. But then again we must remember, that “all chance is but direction
which we cannot see.” Blessed be God who leadeth us by ways _we_ know
not, but which _he_ knows, and which will lead us to the glorifying of
his name, when that is our object. I must not omit to give you the name
and address of our fellow-labourer. It is “Dr. Don Manuel Fernandez de
Córdova, Vicario General del Ejército del Peru, y Cura de Salamanca del
Obispado de Arequipa.” I have given you this address in Spanish to enable
you to write direct to our friend, should you feel so inclined.

I shall now leave Truxillo, but before I go on board, shall just notice
a little incident. Truxillo is about six miles distant from Huanchaco,
which is the sea port town of that quarter. In going down to this port,
I happened to get a very bad horse, which soon becoming restive, I was
obliged to leave it at a house upon the road, and to walk down under a
burning sun. After I had walked more than half the way, a person came
riding up to me and offered me a horse, which of course I accepted.
He told me he had observed me on foot from a distance, and had pushed
forward to offer me assistance. Upon entering into conversation I found
my obliging friend was a peasant, belonging to a neighbouring village,
where he had a family to which he was returning. We spoke a little about
education in general, and of his family in particular. I learned from
him that he could read, and was anxious that his children should be well
instructed. I asked him if he had ever seen the New Testament, to which
he replied in the negative, and from less to more, he intimated to me
that he would be glad to purchase one if he could find it, for the use
of himself and of his children. When we arrived at Huanchaco, he would
accept of no remuneration for his kindness, and as I found my luggage
there not embarked, I brought him a New Testament and made him a present
of it, in return for his unsolicited and friendly attentions. He received
it most thankfully, and we parted.

On the 24th we sailed for Guayaquil, but as we carried a gentleman with
us at the request of the government, we had to call at Paita to land
him there. We cast anchor in that port on the 26th, after sun-set, and
early next morning I went ashore to see the place, and took three New
Testaments with me. I went into a store near the landing-place, and
being invited, took a seat upon a bale of cotton. After some general
conversation, I opened my treasure, and offered the New Testaments for
sale at one dollar each, and in a few minutes they were bought. Some
little time after, I was asked if I had any more. I replied that I had,
but that they were in the ship. I immediately went on board, and just as
we had got our anchor up, a boat came along-side, in which I recognized
the person who had asked me for more New Testaments. He came on board
and bought two dozen, for which he paid me eighteen dollars. As we were
by this time under way, the boat had to return ashore without loss of
time, whilst we, with a most propitious gale, made for this port.—On the
evening of the 29th we cast anchor off the small town of Puná, on the
island of the same name. You will remember that this island is famous
in the conquest of Peru, by the Spaniards. According to the accounts of
it that remain, it seems to have been very populous at that time. It
is not so now. There is, on the whole island, only one little village,
namely, the one I have mentioned, and which does not contain above 200
inhabitants. We landed at this little place for a pilot to conduct
us up the river. I took with me, as I had done at Paita, three New
Testaments. When we landed, we found some people on the beach, to whom
we communicated intelligence of the rapid progress of Bolivar. We were
invited into one of the houses, and after having talked a little upon
various subjects, I opened my casket and presented my New Testaments,
which they were all very curious to see. Whilst they were looking through
them, one of the neighbours came in. “Here!” said one who was examining
the New Testament, “here is a book that will tell you about the beginning
of the world, and a great many other things.” His friend replied, that he
cared very little about the _beginning_ of the world, but that he wished
to know something about the _end of it_. Upon hearing this, I told him
that the book he had in his hands was the very book that would suit him,
as it would inform him particularly about the end of the world. I sold
the three New Testaments in this same house, and as our captain had by
this time made arrangements with the pilot, we got on board again, and
set sail. On the following night (the 30th) we arrived at this place, at
eight o’clock. Before we cast anchor, an English gentleman came on board,
to whom I had a letter of introduction. He kindly invited me to his
house, where I am comfortably lodged, and from which I now write you.

I intend to stop in this place only a few days, during which I shall
endeavour to dispose of as many New Testaments as I can, and in the way
that may be most profitable. I now close this letter, and shall inform
you of the success I meet with here, in my next communication.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                         _Guayaquil, 11th October, 1824._

My letter of the 5th current will inform you of the motives and objects
which have brought me to this place. It will also inform you of what
progress I have made in the circulation of the Holy Scriptures, and in
objects connected therewith, from my leaving Lima till my arrival in
this quarter. I proceed, therefore, to state to you the occurrences of
Guayaquil in reference to these matters.

Some time ago, and of which I believe I informed you, I sent from Lima
twenty New Testaments to a Gentleman here, to be sold at one dollar
each, if opportunities should offer, of disposing of them among his
friends. This gentleman holds a principal situation in the government,
and had been recommended to me by a relation of his in Truxillo, as a
person desirous of doing good. Upon my arriving here, I called upon him,
and found him to be a person worthy of the honourable appellation just
mentioned. He told me he had disposed of the New Testaments, and he gave
me twenty dollars which he had received for them.

As soon as I had reached this place, I mentioned to some persons that I
had a supply of New Testaments for sale, and in consequence I sold one
hundred and sixty-eight copies. After thinking for some time upon what
would be the speediest and most effectual way of disposing of the New
Testaments, it occurred to me that the best thing I could do would be
to print an advertisement, and to give notice of the sale by posting
these up in the public places of the different towns I pass through on
my journey. This, you will see, would at once draw the attention of the
_public_. The only objection that occurred to me was, that it would be
a kind of challenge to our opponents, or at least an intimation of our
hostile operations. This obstacle I kept in mind, but did not think
our adversaries would be able to make any effectual resistance. More
powerful, I believe, are those who are for us than those who are against
us. The encouragement to make such an attempt as this, arises from the
great and happy changes already effected by the revolution going on in
this country, and, I trust, now concluding. I could not have ventured
upon such a thing under the Spanish government. What is going forward in
these countries is truly a _revolution_ in every sense of the word.

I accordingly wrote out an advertisement, and got it printed in the
government printing-office in this place. Translated into English it runs
thus: “To be sold in (_a_) the New Testament of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
one volume, well printed, and neatly bound, at the low price of _eight_
rials. This sale will continue for (_b_) days only, and it is expected
that those who wish to procure for themselves this sacred code of our
Holy Religion, will improve the occasion now offered them.” As this
advertisement was intended not for this place alone, but for others also,
I left the blank (_a_) to be filled up with the pen to suit each place,
and the blank (_b_) I leave for the number _one_, _two_, or _three_,
as my time will permit, and as the importance of the town visited may
require. When these notices were finished, I caused some to be put up
in this place, saying that the sale would be for _three_ days only. In
a few minutes after putting them up, I enjoyed the great satisfaction
of seeing it produce much better effects than I had anticipated. At
_noon_ the notices were put up and at _one o’clock_ I had sold _fifteen_
copies. In the next hour I sold _forty-seven_. In the course of an hour
and a half during the time the store was open in the afternoon, I sold
_one hundred and twelve_. Next day I sold 262 copies. The day following,
which was also one of the three days of sale, happened to be a festival
day held to celebrate the declaration of independence in this town four
years ago. The stores in consequence were all shut, and public business
suspended. Nevertheless, there were _eleven_ copies sold during a few
minutes before breakfast, when the store was open for some particular
purpose. To-day I set out on my journey to Quito, bu I may perhaps
sell some before I go, as I cannot go off before four o’clock in the
afternoon, having to sail up the river with the flood tide.

The whole number disposed of in this place is 615, and for these I have
received 542 dollars 2 rials.—The greater part were sold one by one at
eight rials each, but sometimes I sold a dozen or two together, and in
that case sold them somewhat cheaper. To the number of copies already
mentioned, I add the 30 disposed of, as noticed in my last, and three
copies sold in Truxillo of those in superior binding, making in all
648 copies since the commencement of my tour. To the amount of monies
received in the same time as above, I add, what I received from Dr.
O’Donovan, from the gentleman here as previously mentioned, and for those
sold in Paita and Puná, and the three just noticed, making 153 dollars,
amounting in all to 695 dollars 2 rials. Of this sum, I have remitted 500
dollars to Messrs. Cochran and Robertson, of Lima, with whom I keep my
accounts. This sum will be applied to carrying forward the translation
and printing of the Scriptures into the _Peruvian_ language, agreeably to
your resolution upon the subject, communicated to me some time ago.

Need I add anything to the above by way of comment or observation? Is it
not most gratifying to see so many seeds sown in this town? Let us join
together in prayer, that He who causeth the rain to descend from heaven
to fertilize the ground, and to raise into fruit the puny efforts of man,
may cause his blessing to be upon the seed sown in this place. As it is
sown in weakness may it be raised in strength, and produce at least a
hundred fold.

P.S.—_12th October._—Our boat did not sail yesterday, and thus gave me
the opportunity of adding 71 to the number of copies formerly mentioned,
and 71 dollars to account.

The preceding sentence was written in the morning, and now, in the
afternoon, I add 52 copies more, making in all, in Guayaquil, 738.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                          _Guaranda, 25th October, 1824._

My last letter to you was written in Guayaquil on the 12th instant. On
that occasion I noticed that I had taken that freedom with you in regard
to writing, which we often take with our friends without the danger or
the thought of offending on the one hand or on the other. The letter
referred to was short and could not well be longer from the circumstances
in which I was then placed. Before I had finished it, the master of
the canoe in which I was to leave Guayaquil, had knocked at the door
according to appointment, at four o’clock in the morning. Although,
however, that letter was short, I did not consider that I had left you
uninformed as to the circumstances that had occurred during my journey
from Lima to Guayaquil, as well as those that had occurred in the place
last mentioned. I wrote upon that subject two letters of some length, to
the British and Foreign Bible Society, detailing these matters with some
degree of minuteness. Of these two letters I requested Mr. B. to forward
you copies, and doubt not that such will be forwarded to you immediately
upon their arrival.

In the two letters referred to, I stated the measures I had taken in
circulating the Scriptures in Guayaquil, and the unexpected and happy
results which followed in the sale of 738 copies of the New Testament.
It was gratifying, I assure you, to see in this manner almost the whole
city come together to hear the word of God, and it was not less so, to
pass along the streets and to count one, two, three, a dozen perhaps,
diligently engaged in reading their New Testaments. Who could pass along
under such circumstances, in any other frame than that of thanksgiving
and prayer?—thanksgiving to God for having disposed so many to attend
to the things which belong to their everlasting peace, and which I may
say, have been hitherto hid from their eyes,—and prayer, that the eyes of
their understanding might be enlightened, that they might be turned from
darkness to light, and might enjoy that inheritance which the Lord hath
prepared for them that love him. Nor could I feel otherwise, nor withhold
from expressing those feelings, as I walked over the spot where sin has
deposited his spoils won in that place. The small and the great are
there. My prayer to God was, that through means of the word of life then
circulated, many from that spot might, at the voice of the Archangel,
awake to life and everlasting glory.

We read in the sacred page upon a certain occasion, some thousands of
years ago, when the sons of God came to present themselves before him,
Satan came also among them. The same seems to have been his practice
in Jerusalem, in Antioch, in Philippi, as well as upon other occasions
of ancient and modern date. That he was not absent on this occasion in
Guayaquil, we may _a priori_ be assured of. That he was successful,
however, I have not yet learned. I did, indeed, overhear that some
priest had said something against the reading of the New Testament,
but I had some suspicion that the information was not quite correct.
As a counterpart to this, several priests and friars bought of the New
Testaments. At one time, I think there were _five_ friars in the store
at one time to purchase, and one of these took _thirteen_ copies. At
another time, a friar, who had bought a New Testament, came afterwards
inquiring very anxiously for the whole Bible, and was much disappointed
upon learning that there was none. I told him that some two months after,
some Bibles might be expected, and that as only 50 copies were ordered,
he had better put down his name if he wished to secure one for himself.
Upon my telling him so, he immediately subscribed for _two_ copies.
This person told me that all the friars in his convent had bought New
Testaments, and that they were all highly pleased with them. It is really
encouraging to see the word of God circulate in this quarter with little
or no opposition.—I may add further regarding this matter, that I was
upon very good terms with the rector of Guayaquil during the few days I
remained there. I paid him a visit, accompanied by a friend to introduce
me, and next day I received a very courteous visit from him in return,
accompanied by the ecclesiastic next in rank to himself. He has, besides,
given me two letters of introduction, warmly recommending me to his
friends in Quito. Do not all these things, my dear friend, lay us under
obligations to give thanks unto him in whose hands are the hearts of all?
And are not such occurrences calculated to encourage us to labour in
this sacred cause and to ask of the Lord _liberal things_ according to
his promise? I am persuaded you so feel, and so act, but still it is not
unnecessary to remind you of these matters, to stir up your pure mind by
way of remembrance, and thus to add line upon line. Let us then continue
instant in prayer, that the Lord would pour out his blessing upon this
country, already white unto harvest.

A little after four o’clock on the morning of the 14th, I got into the
canoe which was to conduct me from Guayaquil to Babahoyo. The river
Guayaquil is navigable at all seasons as far as the latter place, a
distance of about 40 miles, and in the rainy season, when the river is
high, boats pass some 15 miles farther up. The navigation is performed
in balsas, and in large and small canoes. The small canoes are made of a
single tree hollowed out, and the large ones are built like our boats,
and capable of carrying several tons, but made in the shape of the small
canoes. It was in one of the large ones I took my passage to Babahoyo. It
is in general by no means a pleasant voyage that is made between these
two places. On the one hand, the heat is very great; and on the other,
the mosquitos are numerous and active. The effects arising from the
bite of this troublesome insect are still, at the distance of more than
a week, very visible on my hands, and also on my legs, where they were
defended by the stocking only. On the first day, owing to the excessive
heat, I felt very unwell, but enjoyed good health on the following day.
On this occasion I experienced from some of my fellow-passengers those
friendly and soothing attentions which adorn the female character, and
which, on several occasions, I have seen exhibited in regard to myself
and to others during my residence in this country. We were nearly three
days in our passage. The river _abounds_ with alligators. I might almost
say, it is _full_ of them. Great numbers lie basking on the banks with
their horrible mouths wide open, and upon coming close up to them they
plunge into the river, and swim about like so many logs floating around
you. At one time I counted, in a very short distance, all at one view,
on one side of the river, to the number of forty, and at another time I
saw twenty, close together. Very few are found at or below Guayaquil, as
the water is salt for some miles above the town. In the rainy season,
however, when the great quantity of fresh water keeps the salt water
down below the town, the alligator is found farther down. I made several
inquiries as to the feeling of this animal towards man in this quarter,
but could not get any well authenticated information of its seizing upon
human kind, and the frequency of bathing in the river speaks the same
language. It seems, in this river, still to observe that fear and regard
to man which all the animal creation once possessed, but which has now
in regard to several animals been effaced, and in most cases, I believe,
through the cruelty of man towards the animal creation. All accounts,
however, agreed in affirming that the alligators here often seize upon
hogs, and other small animals, when found close to the river. Whilst
speaking upon this subject I may also notice, that in all the low lands
between the sea and the mountains in the parts subject to periodical
rains, lions, tigers, and serpents abound, particularly the latter. The
lions I am told do not attack man, nor does the serpent, except when
trode upon.

Many topics of conversation occurred during our passage up the river. The
sale of our New Testaments was known to every body, and thus afforded a
subject of conversation in which we could all take a part. Of course I
had also something to say upon this subject, as it was well known that
I was the seller of them. Two copies were on board, one of which had
been purchased by the captain of our canoe, and the other by one of the
passengers. I have already told you of the evangelical aspect of the
streets of Guayaquil, and the same aspect at times was exhibited on
board, both of the New Testaments being frequently in use at the same
time. During the many things that were said, arising from what was read,
(the reading being frequently aloud,) a conversation took place, the
relation of which will probably interest you, and more especially as it
affords a specimen of the progress of _thinking_ upon religious subjects
in this country. The subject was a delicate one, but so much the better,
as a specimen. The worship of saints was the matter treated of, though I
do not remember what gave rise to it. I stated my views upon the subject,
appealing to the Scriptures and to common sense in support of my opinion.
A very keen and interesting conversation immediately took place, in which
four, besides myself, took a part, and you will be surprised when I tell
you that three of the four took my side of the question. The one who was
opposed to us happened to be a stout disputant, and thus gave occasion to
a thorough discussion of the matter. Among other things brought forward
to show the incongruity and sinfulness of the worshipping of saints, I
stated that the Apostle Peter himself, (who according to them is the
prince of Apostles and saints,) refused this worship, and in proof of
this, I referred him to the tenth chapter of the Acts. This passage was
turned up and read by one of the company, and it appeared to all of us,
except one, conclusive upon the subject. Our opponent, however, defended
himself, by alleging that although Peter, upon that occasion, refused
worship, he refused it because he was not glorified, but that after
death things were otherwise.—You agree then, I remarked, that worship
is not to be given to the saints when upon earth, but it is lawful, you
say, to give this worship to them after their death. Let us then go to
another passage, I said, and see who of the inhabitants of heaven are to
be worshipped. I then referred to the last chapter of the Revelation,
namely, “When I had heard and seen, I fell down before the feet of the
angel who showed me these things. Then saith he unto me, See thou do it
not, for I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and
of them who keep the sayings of this book: _Worship God_.” This passage
cut off the refuge which our friend had taken in his distinction between
worshipping a saint on earth, and a saint in heaven. He then took refuge
in _the church_, alleging that since authority had been given to it by
Jesus Christ to order and direct the concerns of his kingdom after his
ascension, it was our duty to obey its orders, and one of these orders
was, the praying to the saints. You know, of course, how _I_ would have
got rid of this objection, that is, by sweeping away this authority of
the church altogether, and I stated this to be my opinion. The captain
of our canoe, who took a large share in the conversation, and who saw in
the church an authority to which he considered himself bound to submit,
assailed our opponent by another argument, and a very effectual one. He
came close up to him, and with an air of having something in his mind
worth saying, “Is it not,” said he, “the duty of children to reverence
their parents, and to obey them readily and constantly?”—“Certainly it
is,” replied his friend. Our Captain continued: “And if a parent should
tell his child to steal, to lie, and such like things, should the child
obey?”—“Certainly not,” was the reply. “You are right,” says the Captain,
“and that is just our case with the church. It is our duty to obey it, as
it is our duty to obey our parents, but if our parents or the church bid
us do what is obviously wrong, in that case it is our duty to _disobey_.”
You see what an excellent argument this was, and it completely silenced
the other, and left him without any thing to say upon the subject, except
mere general talk and repetition. Our Captain having gained this triumph,
turned to one of the four, who seemed rather to acquiesce in the strength
of our arguments from the Scripture, than zealously to defend our side,
and put this question to him. “Can you tell me,” said he, “why the priest
reads all the service and prays in Latin, a language of which I do not
understand a word, and thus leaving me, when in church, as a mere statue,
without knowing what I am saying or doing?” This was a hard question, and
it was answered significantly, but without words. Our Captain next comes
up to me, and says, “You see every one sets up his little machine to gain
his dollar.” I thought I understood his meaning, although couched under a
figure, but as I wished it to be well understood by all, I asked him what
he meant by it. After a short delay he answered me, by stating, that the
church and the priests had made various laws and ceremonies for their own
benefit, and that they might thus put a dollar into their pocket.—Various
other things were said, and among which the New Testament was praised as
a book any one might read and understand, and not like the prayers of
the priests, which no one understood, perhaps not themselves. One of the
four alluded to, towards the end of the conversation, said, in a very
distinct voice, and in the hearing of all, “If I were going to die, this
is my faith; I believe that there is one God who made all things, and
that there is one Redeemer who died for us, and who rose again; and as
to the worshipping of saints, and all the rest of it, I know nothing.” I
should not omit an observation of one of our female passengers. When two
of us were debating about the worship of saints, she observed to me that
she did not like such conversation. Why so, I replied. Because, said she,
if saints are not to be worshipped, then it will follow that we are not
to pray to the Virgin Mary neither. I said, in reply, that I thought her
reasoning worth being heard, as it was a fair deduction, and requested
her to put it in the form of a question, to the one of the four who
appeared the coolest, and who, as I said before, rather acquiesced in the
strength of our arguments than defended our side. As soon as silence was
obtained, the question was put, and the answer returned was just what I
would have said if called upon to reply.

You will see in the whole of this conversation a freedom of thinking and
of speaking, which you probably did not expect, and I confess that I was
myself greatly surprised at it, notwithstanding the many opportunities I
have had of observing the sentiments of the people of this quarter. In
the higher and more enlightened classes of society, I have often met with
liberal sentiments, but as the two persons who took the chief part in the
above conversation were of the lower class, it was both new to me and
interesting.

On our arrival at Babahoyo, I found lodgings difficult to be procured,
as the houses seemed all occupied. As soon as this was known to one of
my fellow-passengers, he took me to his father’s house, where I enjoyed
comfortable bed and board, kindly bestowed and free of expense, during
the two days I remained in that town. As I intended to make no stay in
this place, but push on, I gave no public intimation regarding the sale
of New Testaments; yet, through means of my fellow-passengers it came
to be known that I had these for sale, and in consequence I disposed of
fifty-one copies for which I received fifty dollars, one copy being a
present. I may mention, before leaving this place, that it lies very
low on the banks of the river, and is overflowed in the rainy season.
The church stands upon a spot elevated some feet above the surrounding
parts; and I am told it is common for the people in that season to go up
to the church door in their canoes. The usual practice in passing from
Babahoyo to Quito, is to hire mules at the former place to Guaranda, and
again to hire anew from that to Quito. I accordingly hired mules for this
place, which cost me five dollars each, on account of the badness of
the roads, though four dollars is the usual charge. The weather at the
present time is very unfavourable, and it is singular to see it so at
this season of the year. I had counted upon fair weather in this quarter
during the whole time of my journey, according to the information which I
had obtained in Lima, and am thus less prepared for rain than otherwise
I would have been had I expected it. I may add also, that I like rain
now worse than ever, as during these two years past I have not seen any.
From Babahoyo to the base of the mountains the roads were very deep and
bad. When we began to ascend the mountains, we found ourselves still
worse situated. The very steep ascent, and the clayey slippery roads,
rendered the journey very unpleasant, and not a little dangerous from
the slipping of the mules, which were frequently brought down upon their
knees. I shall not detain you for the present with a minute account of
the journey to this place, suffice it to say, that I arrived, here, the
day before yesterday in the afternoon in perfect health and safety; and
I feel, I assure you, upon looking back upon the road over which I have
passed, a new motive for thanksgiving to the Father of mercies for my
daily and hourly preservation. I shall just farther add, as descriptive
of the mountains, that on the first day of our ascent, the barometer in
the valley, in the morning, stood at 29.950, and where we lodged in the
evening it stood at 26.141, which indicates a great rise. Where we lodged
on the evening following it stood at 22.085. On the next day we passed
the highest part of the ancient Indian road, where the barometer stood at
21.322.

The situation of Guaranda, from which I now write you, is about ten miles
S. W. of the great Chimborazo. This king of mountains raises its majestic
hoary head full in view. It is deeply covered from the top, almost to
the base, with everlasting snow—snow which must have fallen, if not in
the days of Adam, at least in the days of Noah. To-morrow I set off for
Riobamba, when I expect to have a fuller view of it, as the road passes
along it close to the skirts of its snowy mantle. Guaranda contains about
1500 inhabitants, mostly Indians, who all speak the ancient Peruvian
language. There are several little towns in the glens within the
district, containing in all 14,000 inhabitants, and who all speak the
same language. You will recollect that this is the language into which
the New Testament has lately been translated in Lima, as mentioned in
my former letters, and you will see here a still more ample field of
usefulness for this translation, and the more so, when I add, that not
only in this district is the language spoken, but also in all the towns
in this quarter as far as Quito. What a wonderful extent and uniformity
must the ancient Peruvian empire have had. The inhabitants of this town
and the Indians of Peru have exactly the same features and countenance,
at well as language.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                          _Riobamba, 31st October, 1824._

Soon after my arrival in the town of Guaranda, I called upon the
Governor, and made known to him the object of my journey in this
quarter. I found him a man of intelligence, and a friend of the British
and Foreign Bible Society. Observing him to be a person worthy of all
confidence, and very desirous of the instruction of his countrymen, I
made known to him, without reserve, the plans and operations of the Bible
Society, and that I was travelling to forward its sacred object. He was
much pleased with the brief view of the Society which I gave him. He
wished to see the New Testaments, and became the first purchaser himself.
He also called upon those around to buy for themselves, by telling them
to come and learn to be Christians from this book. I received many
friendly attentions from him during the two days I remained in that
place, and I think we formed a kind of friendship which may contribute to
forward the objects of the Society in that quarter on future occasions.
Notwithstanding my printed notices, and the encouragement of the
Governor, I sold but a very few copies in that place, the whole number
being thirteen. One cause of there being so few sold is, that almost all
the inhabitants are Indians, and do not understand the Spanish language,
at all events cannot read it. To which may be added the general apathy
which always exists in small towns. The few copies, however, which have
been circulated in that town, will form a beginning (I may say of an
era) in that place, and will create a desire for more, both there and in
the villages around, when, on a future occasion, some pilgrim from your
Society shall climb the Andes to visit their abode.

On the 29th I left Guaranda on my way to this town. You will see by
the map, that in visiting Riobamba, I was going out of the straight
road to Quito, but I was anxious to visit this place, if peradventure
the Lord would incline the hearts of some here, as in other places to
receive the word of God; and, generally speaking, my wish is to pave
the way for future operations, as well as to drop a few seeds whilst so
doing, and thus to be a pioneer in your service, in the service of this
people, and, I trust, in the service of God. I told you that Guaranda,
and the villages around it, lay upon the Andes; they are not, however,
at the top, but lie on the western side or declivity of the great ridge,
or Cordillera. After leaving Guaranda, there is nearly a whole day’s
climbing before you reach the top. Upon reaching the highest parts of
the ridge, you have something like a plain, though of no great extent;
and out of this plain, or rather this mountain, and from your very feet,
rises the great Chimborazo. From Guaranda we turned our faces towards
this great mountain, and began to ascend. As we approached it, it began
to frown, and to forbid our drawing nearer. The rain, in a little time,
began to fall very heavily; we pushed on; the hail succeeded, accompanied
by vivid lightning, whose rapid flight, from our elevated situation, we
could trace from heaven to earth. To crown the whole, the loud thunder
rolled along as if Chimborazo were tumbling down upon us. To pursue our
journey, under such circumstances, would have been foolish, and perhaps
fatal. We accordingly turned our backs upon the mountain, and began to
descend, and to seek refuge in the first hut we could come to. After some
little time we descried a thatched cottage, but we could not reach it, as
the descent to it from the ridge, along which the road lay, was too rapid
for our mules. Another and another we had to pass in this way, without
being able to take shelter from the storm. We at length found a house to
which we could descend, and I rode on towards it, and made inquiry if
we could be lodged there. I received an answer in bad Spanish, saying,
they did not understand what I said. I was obliged, therefore, to wait
till the guide arrived, who understood the Indian language, and upon his
putting the same question which I had put, we obtained refuge from the
storm, and found, in our circumstances, the cottage converted into a
palace.

I thus found myself in a cottage belonging to one of the indigenous
inhabitants of the country, and had thus an opportunity of learning
some things which could not have been so well learned in any other
situation. I found that the inhabitants of this hut understood only their
native language; and learned that this was the case with all the rural
inhabitants of these quarters. The language spoken is that of Peru, into
which, through your beneficence, the New Testament has been translated,
and part of which will soon be printed. The need of having the word of
God translated into this language, is thus rendered more evident, and we
see the field to be watered by it increased.

Towards the evening the sky cleared up, and as the sun was setting, the
aspect around became beautiful. I stepped to a little distance from the
cottage, and reached the road on the ridge which we had left some hours
before. As I walked backwards and forwards in this spot, enjoying the
serene and peaceful evening, I felt gratitude rise in my heart to the
Father of mercies, for my protection and shelter from the storm. I had
just gone over that beautiful hymn, of which the first and last verses
follow:

    “When all thy mercies, O my God,
      My rising soul surveys;
    Transported with the view, I’m lost,
      In wonder, love, and praise.

    “Through all eternity to Thee
      A joyful song I’ll raise;
    For, oh, eternity’s too short
      To utter all thy praise.”

I had just repeated this companion of my travels, and was beginning to
descend to the cottage, when I observed a person coming up, mounted on
a very good horse, and leading another still better. I wondered to see
him bend his course to the uninhabited mountains at such a late hour,
and had the curiosity to wait his approach, to make inquiry. “Pray
friend,” said I, “where can you be going this way at so late an hour?”—“I
am seeking you,” was the reply.—“Seeking me!” I replied. “Yes,” said
he, “I have a letter for you from the Governor of Guaranda.” I received
and opened the letter, and read, in the language of friendship, that my
good friend, dreading that I should be worsted by the storm, had sent an
excellent horse for me, with orders to his servant to travel on until
he should find me, at whatever hour it might be, and to see me safe in
Riobamba. Whatever might have been my feelings before, they were, at
least, now “lost in wonder, love, and praise.” I should have mentioned,
also, that the servant delivered me a little basket, which I found to be
filled with provisions for our journey, and into which, also, the hand of
friendship itself had dropped a few sweet cakes. All these things, under
the circumstances in which I found myself, had a powerful effect upon
my mind, and encouraged me anew to hope in God and to persevere in his
service.

In a few minutes we stepped down to the hut, procured some provisions
for the horses, some repast for ourselves, and passed the night as
comfortably as we could. Early next morning we began to prepare for our
journey. I had given our hostess a rial now and a rial then to give
her confidence in my honesty; for there is some distrust in regard to
provisions bestowed upon strangers, and it is founded, I believe, on
experience. Before setting out, I paid her all her demands, and gave her
a little more; upon which she lifted up both her hands, and prayed for
a blessing upon me, and thus we parted. After travelling for some time,
Chimborazo looked out from the clouds, the first appearance of which, I
confess, filled me with a kind of dread, more especially as I thought
it frowned upon us again. As we went on, however, the day brightened,
and we reached the mountain in due time, and took up our lodging in an
uninhabited house on the side of it. During my evening walk the clouds
entirely disappeared from the mountain, and it seemed to sit down in
beautiful splendour beside me, and thus we became more than reconciled to
each other. Next morning the same beautiful appearance was exhibited as
we set out on our way to Riobamba.

At mid day we reached this place, which contains about 3000 inhabitants,
with a considerable population in the villages around. I called upon
the Governor, and presented him a letter of introduction which I had
brought from the Governor of Guaranda. In this gentleman I also found
a friend, and an encourager of our object. He directed me to the house
of a friend, where I have a comfortable lodging. Upon stating to him
my object, and showing him the advertisement which I wished to fix up
in the public parts of the town, he ordered his clerk to fill up the
blanks according to my directions, and then sent one of the Alguazils to
put them up. He bought six New Testaments himself, and during the two
days of my stay here, I have disposed of 35 copies. To-morrow I set out
for Ambato, accompanied by a soldier, which the Governor has ordered to
attend me by way of a guide and a guard. Considering the shortness of my
stay here, and considering that many more New Testaments would have been
bought had time been afforded, I thought it advisable to leave 50 copies
in the hands of the Governor, who kindly undertook to dispose of them as
circumstances offered. For the same reason I left 50 copies with him to
be forwarded by the first opportunity to the Governor of Guaranda. I have
also had another object in view in doing so, and that is to convert, as
it were, these individuals into members and agents of your Society, the
importance of which you will at once see.

I have already noticed to you that the rural inhabitants of the district
of Guaranda speak the Indian language only. The same also may be said of
all the districts in this quarter, as far as Quito, I formerly stated to
you, that in Peru a million of souls stood in need of the translation
of the Scriptures into the Quichua language, and you now see how many
thousands more may be added to this number. I have no doubt but the
importance of the translation in question will lead you to extend your
beneficence to the translating and printing of the whole Scriptures into
this language. When I find persons, particularly clergymen, with whom
I can communicate with confidence, I state to them what has been done
in regard to this translation, and the use that may be made of it in
instructing the indigenous inhabitants of this quarter, which is by far
the most numerous class of the population. To such individuals I mention,
also, the happy effects produced by the schools in the Gaelic and Irish
languages. I have succeeded in convincing many of the importance and
practicability of educating the native population, and am much encouraged
by the interest I find taken in this matter, by many persons of name and
influence in the places I have visited. In this town, the prior of one of
the convents, and the rector of the town, have promised to forward this
object as far as lies in their power, and on my part I have promised to
forward them some copies of this translation as soon us they are ready.

On the whole, there is great cause for thanksgiving, in seeing the
Scriptures meet with so ready a reception in this quarter, and the more
so when we consider that this is the first time this treasure has been
offered them. Let us pray that the word of God may have free course in
this place, and that it may be glorified.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                             _Quito, 8th November, 1824._

Through the tender mercies of the Lord I arrived in this city yesterday
morning in health and safety. The same gracious hand who has guided me
hitherto has provided for me a lodging in this place, in the house of
the Marquis de San José, where I enjoy all the comforts that kindness
and plenty can bestow. My last letter to you was dated the 31st ultimo,
from Riobamba, and detailed the various circumstances that occurred in my
journey from Guayaquil to that place. It now remains for me, therefore,
to state the particulars of my journey from Riobamba until my arrival in
this city.

Early on the morning of the 1st current, I set out for Ambato, and
arrived there safely in the afternoon. Ambato is a larger town than
Riobamba, and may contain 5000 people. In this place I found myself
comfortably lodged in the house of the Governor. My luggage, along with
the New Testaments, did not arrive till the following morning. Upon the
arrival of the New Testaments, I showed them to the Governor, and told
him of my intention of advertising them for sale, and inquired in what
shop or store I could conveniently do so. He answered me, by saying, that
his own house was at my service for that purpose. I accordingly stated in
the advertisement, that the New Testaments were on sale at the house of
the Governor, and that the sale would continue but one day. It afforded
me much satisfaction to see the interest taken in this matter by the
Governor and by his lady, both of whom took great pleasure in showing the
New Testaments to those who came to buy, and when I had to go out to pay
or return a visit, they kindly supplied my place until my return.

You cannot but have observed the liberality, kindness, and encouragement
I have met with from the Governors of Guaranda, Riobamba and Ambato, in
the service of the Society. These circumstances are very encouraging
as to your future labours and expectations in this quarter, and are
circumstances of which you will not fail to take advantage. The three
individuals mentioned, will be most ready, I am persuaded, on any future
occasion, to forward in the most obliging and effectual manner the holy
object of your Society. They will also readily lend their influence for
the establishment of Bible Societies in their respective districts, as
soon as a Society of a national character shall be formed in the capital,
to which they may become auxiliaries. Of this Society in the capital,
which I have much in view and at heart, I shall inform you afterwards,
should it please the Lord to conduct me safely to that place. That you
may not, however, lose the advantages already gained by the acquisition
of these gentlemen, as co-operators in your work, I shall here give you
their names and addresses in the style of the country. “Sᵒʳ Coronel
Carlos Araujo, Gobernador de Guaranda; Sᵒʳ Ambrosio Dávalos, Gobernador
de Riobamba; Sᵒʳ Nicolas Bácones, Gobernador de Ambato.” In the preceding
addresses, I have given you verbatim what you should write in addressing
any letter to them. The best manner of communicating with these gentlemen
will be through Guayaquil, as that is the nearest port, and with which
there is constant intercourse. During the time I remained in Guayaquil, I
stopped in the house of Messrs. Robinet and Wheelwright, and found there
every facility afforded me in forwarding the work of the Society. If you
would communicate with that house in your transactions with Guayaquil,
Guaranda, Riobamba, and Ambato, you will find, I am persuaded, all
attention paid to your concerns.

I mentioned above, that my advertisement stated the sale to last for
one day only. I was, however, detained another day, and thus gave an
additional opportunity for purchasing. The whole number sold amounted to
forty-seven copies; but a small number, indeed, yet great as a beginning,
and as an encouragement. I may mention, also, that the rector and several
clergymen bought copies, and that I heard of no opposition.

In one of my letters from Guayaquil I told you that the 200 Bibles you
had ordered me had not arrived in Lima when I left that place, and to
my no small regret. I have, however, regretted that delay a thousand
fold in the course of my journey. I mentioned to you at the same
time, that I had bought one Bible in Lima to carry with me, by way of
a specimen, and to excite an interest to purchase when a supply should
arrive. All my expectations in regard to this have been fully realized.
The many offers I have had to purchase this Bible, have filled me with
pleasure and with pain; pleasure to see so great a desire for the word
of God, and pain in not being able to satisfy that desire. Of the many
occasions in which I have been so placed, none was so pleasing, on the
one hand, nor so painful, on the other, as that which I experienced
with the Rector of Ambato. He had been to visit me, and I went to his
house to return his kindness. After experiencing much attention from
him, he in a very formal manner urged me to sell him the Bible. I stated
to him, upon this occasion, what I had been called on to state upon so
many other occasions, namely, that the Bible I had was a kind of common
property, that my object in carrying it with me was to show it to all,
and to encourage all who wished for it, by informing them that a number
of copies were coming, and that their desire would be realized in the
possession of this precious volume. He however renewed his request,
besought me to let him have it, and urged his claim in the name of all
his flock, for whose use he said he particularly wished it. My difficulty
here was great, yet I considered my reasons for not parting with this
volume still greater, and was thus obliged most unwillingly to withhold
what, under other circumstances I would most gladly have bestowed. He
said, among other things, to induce me to yield to his request, that I
would be able to find a copy in Quito, for he had learned that some had
been sold here some time ago, as was actually the case, for 40 copies of
the 500 sold in Lima were brought here. I told him that there were some
doubts as to my obtaining a copy in Quito, but that I would make inquiry
when I should arrive there, and in the event of finding one I should send
him my own copy, and at the price at which I purchased the other. Upon
these terms we came to an agreement, and he remarked that I should not
make any hesitation in regard to the price, for he would willingly pay
what should be charged.

On the 4th current I left Ambato on my way to this city. There is a town
called Tacunga or Latacunga about 20 miles distant from Ambato, and on
the straight road to this place. From the consideration of having been
much detained in my journey from Guayaquil, I wished to reach this city
as quickly as possible, and on that account I intended not to stop at
Tacunga, but to push on to a village called Mulaló, and to pass the night
there, in order that I might reach Quito on the following day. I was
the more inclined to do so, as I understood that Tacunga was inhabited
almost wholly by Indians, none of whom could use our books. Another
arrangement, however, had been determined on by a higher authority than
mine, and for a purpose which you will presently see. I had scarce left
Ambato, when a Friar travelling for Quito, came up with me upon the road.
As he was accompanied by a servant only, and unencumbered with luggage,
he could get faster on his way than I could, accompanied as I was by
the loaded mules. We, notwithstanding, rode together for some time, and
fell into various conversation. He urged me to go forward with him, and
to leave the loaded mules to follow us, which, after some hesitation, I
complied with, and we went on together at a gentle trot. His intention
was to stop all night at Tacunga, as he had some concerns to arrange
there. He kindly invited me to stay there also during the night, in
order that we might go on together next day towards Quito, offering me a
hospitable lodging in the convent of St. Dominic, to which he belonged.
I still, however, thought it my duty to push forward, so as to reach
Quito next day, and which I could not do if I stopped all night at
Tacunga. Before we arrived at the place, in passing a river, my horse,
upon reaching the bank, which was rather difficult of access, stumbled,
plunged again into the river, and nearly threw me into it. I got safely
out, though considerably wet. This circumstance determined me to stop
at Tacunga till I got my clothes dried. Upon reaching the town, I went
with my friend to the convent, where I got myself comfortably dried, and
prepared for the journey. Before I was ready to set out, there came on a
thunder storm, and by the time the weather cleared up, it was too late
to set out. My good friends in the convent strongly urged me to pass the
night with them, and which I consented to do.

I found this town larger than I expected, and as I was to pass the night
in it, I was anxious to seize the opportunity of offering the word of God
to them, although I had not much confidence as to the success I should
meet with. In carrying this purpose into effect, I found myself rather
embarrassed. I was lodged in a convent, and knew not what disposition
the friars might have to the distribution of the Scriptures, especially
to their being sold in the convent. I wished myself lodged elsewhere,
and indeed any where else, but could not with any decency remove, as my
friends loaded me with kindness. Had I known, upon my entering the town,
that I was to have a sale of the New Testaments there, I would not have
gone to the convent, more especially as I had a letter of introduction
to the Governor and to another gentleman in the place. After some
hesitation, I resolved to make an attempt where I was. I went pensively
to the case in which the New Testaments were, took out one, and went
direct to the Prior to show it to him, praying all the while as I went,
that the God of heaven would dispose his heart and the hearts of the
rest to befriend the circulation of his holy word. My prayer was heard.
The Prior was much pleased with the New Testament, and bought it. He
showed it to one of the rest, and recommended it, whilst I did not fail
to put in a word to the same effect, pointing out the advantages of
the Scriptures to all, and how more immediately it concerned them, as
ministers of religion, to possess it, and to recommend it to others. Yes,
said one of them, it is the very book which concerns us, and we would
gladly encourage others to receive it. I then told them that I had a
number of copies, and that I wished to expose them to sale in that town.
I showed the Prior the advertisement, and said, I should be glad to have
the sale in the convent, if it were agreeable to him. By all means, said
he, and immediately he filled up the blanks in the notices with his own
hand, and sent a person to fix them up. The advertisements were scarcely
up, when one, and another, and another came tripping in to purchase a New
Testament. In a little, the buyers thickened, whilst all the friars stood
around enjoying the sight, and warmly recommending the sacred volume to
all who came, and assisted me in the sale when occasion required. The
result was, that in two hours and a half, that is, till the night came
on, I sold _one hundred and four_ copies, which was more than I had sold
in Guaranda, Riobamba, and Ambato taken together, although I remained
two days in each of these places. You see, by this time, I dare say, why
superior arrangements called me to stop at this place, contrary to my own
intention.

Among others, whom the sound of our horn brought together, came the
Vicar of the town _in propria persona_. Upon learning who he was, I
made my obeisance, and entered into conversation with him, as to the
advantages of the word of God, and the duty of making it known to all,
and to my great joy I found in him also a friend to this object. At
an early period of our sale, I brought out the Bible, of which I have
spoken above, and for the purpose there mentioned. It had the desired
effect. It arrested the attention, and could have been sold many a time.
I told all who wished to purchase it, that there would arrive in a few
months a number of copies, and that all would be supplied. None being
able to obtain it, a little circle resolved to improve the occasion to
learn what it contained, while a friar in the middle kept reading aloud
for a considerable time.—There was another attractive, namely, the
Brief View of the Bible Society. This also drew the attention, and was
eagerly read. Their approbation of the object of the Society, and their
wonder at the effects already produced by it, alternately drew forth
corresponding expressions. You need not be told that I relished the
scene before me, and enjoyed a high entertainment. I could not refrain
from silent thanksgiving to the God above, as I brought out another and
another parcel of New Testaments, to which I joined a fervent prayer,
that on this occasion the word of God might be sown in good ground, and
might produce in some thirty, in some sixty, and in some a hundred fold.
I felt also my heart warm within me, whilst the contemplation of the
British character, which was thus brought under review, called forth the
just praises of my native land. O favoured isle! garden of God! where
the fruits of righteousness grow more abundantly than in all the world
beside. Peace be upon thee! In thee may the will of God be done—_as it is
done in heaven_.

By and by the night came on, and our sale closed. After which we
retired to one of the cells and entered into general conversation. We
were all pleased with each other. My friends, on the one hand, seized
every opportunity to show their kindness and attention, and I, on the
other hand, in return for their kindness, amused them with my mountain
barometer, thermometers, and pocket compass, all of which were perfectly
new to them, and highly entertaining. At a proper hour the friars retired
to their cells, and I also retired to mine, where I passed part of the
night in contemplating the scene which had just passed before me, and the
rest in repairing the fatigues of the day.

I told the Prior of the convent and the others, that the sale which had
been effected in that place, so much greater than in the other places I
had visited in their neighbourhood, did great honour to their town. I
took occasion also to return them my sincere thanks for the very active
and friendly part they had taken in this matter, and told them I should
have great pleasure in communicating the same to the Society in London,
and which I accordingly now do. The Prior said that he should be very
glad, upon any future occasion, to forward the objects of the Society as
far as he could, and that in regard to any other supply of the Scriptures
destined for Tacunga, he would most readily take charge of them, and
dispose of them according to the directions which might be sent with
them. The other Friars heartily seconded the Prior in all these matters.
In conversing about the Bibles that were to come to them from Guayaquil,
it was agreed that not fewer than fifty copies would be required for
Tacunga, and I promised to write to Guayaquil in order that this number
might be sent to them upon their arrival there from Lima. At the same
time I write to Lima to forward a sufficient supply to Guayaquil of your
second edition, which must, I should think, be already in Callao, or near
it.

In the preceding part of this letter, I gave you the names and address of
some persons who would gladly carry forward your object in the places
mentioned. I now add to this list another, namely, the Prior already
mentioned, “El R. P. Fr. Manuel Peñaherrera, Prior de Santo Domingo de
Latacunga.” The person just named, as well as all his colleagues, will be
most ready to establish an Auxiliary Bible Society in that place, when
the proper time comes for doing so. I give you also the names of some
others belonging to this convent, as my duty and my promise require of
me, and could wish that in some corner of one of your monthly extracts or
annual reports their names might be recorded, for I think they are worthy
of it; and in seeing their names in any of these publications I shall
feel myself as discharged from what nearly amounts to an obligation, and
which my feelings of respect and gratitude towards my friends led me
into. The names are as follows: Padre Mariano Quintana, Padre Narciso
Molina, Padre Matias Granja. To which I add, as the last, but not the
least, my travelling companion, Padre José Celio.[4]

I conclude this letter, the writing of which has been the means of my
enjoying over again the encouraging scenes which I have endeavoured
to describe, and which I lay before you that you may comply with the
pleasing duty of rejoicing with those that rejoice.—I only add, May God
Almighty prosper you most abundantly in all your undertakings; and unto
whom in all things be glory for ever: Amen.

[4] These names were not inserted in the Society’s Extracts, as the
Secretaries thought the doing so might, perhaps, compromise our friends
there with their superiors. A letter, however, was written to the Prior,
in the name of the Society, conveying to him those sentiments which
his conduct, on the above occasion, called forth. A few weeks ago an
answer was received from the Prior, in reply to this letter, in which he
expresses his continued interest in the object of the Bible Society, and
his desire to circulate the Scriptures in his native country.—It may be
mentioned here also, that a suitable letter was sent by the Society to
the Governor of Guaranda, and that a very friendly reply to it has been
lately received. This gentleman continues a warm friend to the Bible
Society.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                            _Quito, 19th November, 1824._

A considerable time has elapsed since the date of my last letter to you,
and during the same period, if I remember right, I have not been favoured
with any of your communications. So that, as far as mere exchange of
letters is concerned, I am not so much in arrear as you may perhaps be
thinking. It is true, indeed, that it is my part to write to you, rather
than yours to write to me, but that again supposes that I have something
worth communicating. Now, I am sorry to say that this has not been the
case during my partial silence, a silence arising from a very natural
cause, that of having nothing to say. I mean that I have had nothing to
say about the _progress_ of education in this quarter: and though I have
still very little to say upon that subject, yet, knowing you take a great
interest in the well being of this part of the world, and in my feeble
efforts to promote it, I think it my duty to let you know at least where
I am, and what I am doing.

You will observe by the line at the top, that I am in the city of Quito,
and I shall now state to you why I am here, and what I am engaged in. You
know how the war has raged for some time past in Peru, and that Lima has
been for a considerable time in the hands of the enemy. I am not sure
that I have expressed myself correctly in saying _the enemy_, a term
applied by each party to the other, but which in the mouth of a neutral
is an impropriety of speech. I beg leave to justify myself in this, by
informing you that I am not a neutral in this contest, as all my feelings
and my wishes are on the one side, and of course the other side is the
enemy. I leave you to find out at your leisure what side I am on, and
shall proceed to give you what information I have to communicate relative
to our concerns, the concerns of education.

I left Lima in the beginning of September, with the intention of not
returning to it for some time. The immediate cause was the impossibility
of moving forwards in our work under the pressure of existing
circumstances. The very utmost that could be done was to keep hold of
what we had obtained, and even that was done with great difficulty.
Our model school in Lima, at the time I came away, contained about 200
children, a number somewhat less than what it contained some months
previous to that time. This decrease is owing to the great poverty that
existed there, on the one hand; and on the other hand it arose from a
natural fear in the parents lest their children should be picked up on
their way to the School by the recruiting parties, a fear not altogether
groundless. I may mention here, that there is another School on our plan,
containing about 80 children.

You know that, for a considerable time back, I have had a desire to pass
through that part of this Continent where I now am, but I was prevented
from doing so, by the difficulty of leaving Lima in the state in which
things were, and by the prospect of making a rapid progress in extending
education over Peru. At the time I came away, the difficulty referred
to was removed, and the prospect in regard to the other circumstance
mentioned was altogether blasted, at least for a time. The difficulty
I have noticed was the want of a proper master, in whose hands I could
trust the school with confidence. The school, however, at my leaving
Lima, was in the hands of a good master, with an assistant to aid him,
whilst the superintendence of all is in the hands of my excellent friend
the Clergyman, of whom I have often spoken to you with approbation. From
this good friend, notwithstanding these favourable arrangements, I was
obliged to tear myself away. He urged me to stop, and would at length
only hear of my going away in the expectation of my early return, and
in the hope of my visit to England being turned to the advantage of the
schools in Peru, as I trust it will, should I have the happiness to reach
your favoured country.

I thought it advisable, and my duty, to seize the time that thus offered
for verifying my long-intended journey. You know, I dare say, that it
was not the mere desire of jaunting that led me to propose this journey
to myself. The two objects which have hitherto more immediately engaged
my attention in South America are those which form the work respectively
of the British and Foreign Bible Society, and the British and Foreign
School Society. With these two objects in view, I left Lima for Bogotá
the capital of Colombia. Though I can never lose sight of any one of
these two objects, yet that of the Bible Society is the main one in this
journey.

I have been very much pleased with my journey, in the prosperity I have
had in the distribution of the sacred volume. I have observed a very
general desire to possess this book, and I have had the pleasure of
seeing great numbers flock together, not to receive it as a present, but
to buy it. Of upwards of 1500 New Testaments which I had at the outset,
not many remain. I had no Bibles, and was very sorry for it, as, from its
being generally asked for, I am sure I could have sold many copies. It is
gratifying to know that a supply of them may be expected in the course of
a few months; and with this prospect I have revived the spirits of many
who evidently felt disappointed when I told them that I had none.

It is truly a pleasing sight to see so many eagerly seeking after God;
and it cheers the heart of the poor traveller, as he moves along now
through the woods, now over the mountains, to think that he is the means
of cheering the hearts of others, by putting into their hands the only
book which can effectually cheer the heart with solid comfort. I refer
you for further particulars regarding the circulation of the Scriptures
to my letters upon the subject to the British and Foreign Bible Society.

Before I speak of the state and progress of education in Quito, I shall
mention two circumstances which have occurred to me since I left Lima. I
notice these because they are encouraging, as it respects the progress
of education, and because they tend to prove what I have so often stated
to you,—that there is a very general desire throughout this country for
extending the benefits of education to all, and with all possible speed.
The circumstances referred to occurred in Truxillo and in Guayaquil. In
both these places I received proposals from the magistrates to remain
among them, in order to establish schools on our plan, and to promote
the objects of education in general. In both cases I had a struggle
with my feelings, though not with my judgment, in declining the honour
offered me. Though my duty bade me pursue my journey, yet, in consequence
of these proposals, I cannot help taking an additional interest in
the progress of education in the places mentioned; and through the
intercourse that took place upon this subject during my short stay in
these tours, I expect some good will result, of which I shall afterwards
inform you.

I come now to speak of the state and prospects of education in this
city. The state of elementary education here is, at present, very low,
but its prospects are more encouraging. Perhaps you are aware that the
Colombian Government is taking active measures to extend education over
all their share of South America. Some time ago a Central School on the
Lancasterian plan was established in Bogotá, the capital. This school was
set agoing by a friar who had been banished from his native country on
account of his then-called revolutionary principles, and who had learned
the system during his exile. Upon his return to America he established
this school in the capital, which has now existed two or three years. It
is the wish of the government to put a model school in the capital of
each department, and from these schools to send out masters to all the
towns and villages the department contains. For this purpose the friar I
before mentioned, has lately arrived here, and is getting his school-room
prepared. I have had several conversations with this individual, and
have been much pleased in observing the very lively interest he takes in
the education of youth, as well as in the general progress of knowledge
throughout his native country. It is delightful to shake hands with such
persons, and to unite one’s heart with them wherever they are found. I
augur much good from the establishment and direction of schools by a
person of this character. I do from my heart wish him great success, and
a success equal to the desires of his own benevolent mind. The Intendant
or Governor of the department is an excellent man, and very desirous of
the progress of knowledge throughout this quarter. He is urging forward
the school with all diligence; and to supply the children with books, he
has bought of me 50 New Testaments.

The next thing I have to notice is of some interest, and respects female
education. You are aware, that the education of this sex is very limited
in South America. It is so in Quito, as might be expected. From the
consideration that this is a large place, and the chief city of a large
and populous district of country, I was very desirous of doing something
towards establishing a female school or academy here. I spoke to the
Intendant and others upon the subject, and found them all willing to
do whatever was practicable in carrying into effect such a desirable
object. The plan I proposed was, to send for a well-instructed person or
two from England, in order to establish at once a school or academy of
the best description; and I promised to do, on my part, all I could to
procure such persons upon my arrival in England. My proposition was very
favourably received, and a plan was immediately thought of for carrying
it into effect. The want of funds was the only obstacle that occurred,
and where to find them was the object to which the attention of all was
directed. At length it was discovered that there was a certain religious
house in the city which had good funds belonging to it. This house is not
a nunnery, though it is somewhat allied to it. It is what is here called
a Beateria; and if one were called upon to give it a name corresponding
to its nature, it might be called a House of Idleness. This name, at all
events, would suit the character given me of it by the Intendant. To
get this house and its funds was now the object of consideration, and a
petition to the general government of Colombia was thought of for that
purpose. You know that respecting a matter of this kind, it is necessary
to interest the female sex themselves in it. I accordingly spoke with
some ladies upon the subject, and found them very anxious to lend their
influence to obtain the object in question. I am lodged and very kindly
treated in the house of the Marquis de San José, and I wished that the
Marchioness should take the lead in this affair, as a matter of courtesy
on my part, and principally because she is the person of most influence
in the place. I stated to her the plan proposed, of establishing a school
or academy in the style of those in England, and was happy to find that
she entered heartily into it. The way ultimately fixed upon for carrying
forward the plan is this: The lady before mentioned, along with some
female friends, is to draw up a petition to the Intendant, begging that
something may be done for establishing a female academy in Quito. As
soon as this comes into the Intendant’s hands, he will state his opinion
upon the subject, strongly recommending it, and pointing out where the
funds may be obtained for the purpose. The petition thus prepared is to
be put into my hands, and I am to have the honour of laying it before
the Vice-President in Bogotá upon my reaching that city; and such is the
interest taken by the Government in these matters, that I have no doubt
of its complete success.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                            _Quito, 24th November, 1824._

My last letter to you was written from this place, and dated the 8th
current, the day after my arrival. I then stated to you what had
occurred to me from Riobamba until my arrival in this city. I shall now,
therefore, proceed to give you an account of the reception your cause has
met with in Quito.

When I set out from Guaranda on my way to Riobamba, I left four boxes
of New Testaments behind me, partly because I was going out of the
straight road for Quito, and partly because mules could not readily be
had to carry them. These boxes I left in the hands of my good friend the
Governor, who kindly undertook to forward them direct to this city. Upon
my arrival here, I found that these boxes had not arrived, although there
was more than sufficient time. I waited for them with some impatience,
especially as I had disposed of the contents of those I had brought with
me, so that there remained none in my hands for sale in this place.
During this delay of the New Testaments I had many inquiries for them, as
it had got abroad that I had brought with me a good supply for this city.
At length a part arrived, when I learned that the delay was owing to the
owner of the mules. I gave notice publicly of the sale, as I had done in
other places, and in a short time all were sold, amounting to 137 copies.
After these were all gone, the inquiries after them continued, and I had
to put off the inquirers, with telling them that there were two more
boxes expected every minute. Day passed on after day without the arrival
of these, until I was beginning a second time to think them lost.
Yesterday afternoon, however, they safely arrived, and as soon as they
were opened 80 copies were paid for and carried off by a highly respected
clergyman. Fifty of these were for the use of the schools here, and were
purchased on account of the government, agreeably to an order given to
that effect some days previous to their arrival. Twenty-five of the
eighty were purchased at the request of the Provincial of the Convent of
St. Francis, for the express purpose of putting a copy into the hands of
each friar in the convent. I noticed in my last the triumph of our cause
in the convent of St. Dominic, in Latacunga, and it affords me no small
pleasure to be able to record what I may call a triumph of a similar
kind, as just mentioned, regarding the Franciscans in this city. To which
I may add, that the respected clergyman I before referred to, has orders
from, I believe, all the convents to purchase one, two, or more _Bibles_
for them at the moment of their arrival. The remaining five of the above
mentioned eighty were for particular friends.

I have noticed to you, in my preceding letters, the desire manifested
in the places I have passed through, for _the whole Bible_. This desire
has also been manifested in Quito, and in a strong degree. In order to
increase this desire, rather than supply the wants of these places, I
have written to Guayaquil, directing the fifty Bibles which I formerly
ordered from Lima to that place, to be sent to these parts, in due
proportions; only ten or twelve of these will come to this place, and
these are already bespoken. I have also ordered to be sent to the
different towns mentioned in my former letters, a considerable number of
copies of the small New Testament, and of the Books of Psalms, Proverbs,
&c.; the proportion for Quito is 200 of the former, and 200 of the
latter; these I expect will meet with a very favourable reception, and
will fall short of the demand for them. I have thus, you see, distributed
the whole of the supply sent me as mentioned in your last letter, yet
this supply, so distributed, will prove inadequate to the wants and the
demands of these quarters. To meet this demand, we must have recourse to
your _second_ edition of the Bible, of which you have advised me, and of
which I expect a good supply is already on the way to Lima. In that city,
and also in Guayaquil, I have given the necessary directions for sending
proper quantities to each place. The city of Quito is large, and contains
upwards of 50,000 inhabitants. It is also surrounded by a populous
country, of which it is the capital and the centre. On this account I
have ordered to it 500 copies of the whole Bible, with a request to our
correspondent in Guayaquil to remit 500 more, if the wants of the latter
place will admit of it. I have mentioned to you the names of different
persons who offered to manage your concerns in some of the places I have
passed through, and I am happy in having it in my power to say, that
you have found a warm friend and an agent here in the Marquis of San
José, a gentleman of the first respectability in this city, on account of
his personal character, and on account of his large possessions in this
quarter. From this gentleman I have received every friendly attention
during my stay under his hospitable roof. He allowed me to sell the New
Testaments in his own house, and encouraged his friends to purchase them.
In consequence of his readiness to take the charge of the Society’s
concerns here, I have ordered the supplies for Quito, already mentioned,
to be forwarded directly to him. You will also please consider him as
your correspondent for this quarter, and can address to him accordingly.
His address is “Sᵒʳ Manuel de Larrea, Marques de San José, Quito.” I
spoke to this gentleman, also, regarding the formation of a Bible Society
for the district of Quito, whose seat should be in that city. Into this
matter he entered fully and cheerfully, and promised to do every thing
in his power to commence and to carry forward such an establishment, as
soon as a suitable opportunity should offer for doing so. I spoke also to
the Marchioness regarding a Female Bible Society, and had the pleasure of
being assured by her, that nothing should be wanting on her part to set
such a Society on foot. I have thus endeavoured to place things in such a
state as to induce the hope that the concerns of the Bible Society will
not be neglected here, but carried forward in a prosperous manner. I
should have mentioned also, that several gentlemen, with whom I conversed
about the circulation of the Scriptures, and about a Bible Society,
much approved of both, and expressed their readiness to lend their aid
in these matters, I trust these favourable circumstances, which form an
encouraging commencement in this interesting and populous district, will
be followed by results truly beneficial to all the inhabitants here, and
gratifying to the members of the British and Foreign Bible Society.

There is a circumstance indirectly, or rather I should say directly,
connected with our main object, which I should not omit to state to you.
I carried with me two copies of the late Bishop of London’s Evidences
of Christianity, in Spanish. These I bought in Lima about the time I
set off, in the expectation of their doing some good in the course of
the journey. I showed this work to the Marquis, who immediately bought
it. This he eagerly read, and was highly gratified with its contents. I
could have sold the other copy frequently, but refused to sell it, as I
intend to carry it farther on, and to dispose of it in some other place.
The Marquis lent his copy to several of his friends, who were also much
gratified with perusing it. From less to more, the interest in this work
was carried, till it was resolved to print an edition of it in Quito by
subscription, and this subscription is to be solely among the ladies.
This, you see, is a feeling very friendly to the cause of religion, and
of the Bible Society. I suppose I need not to tell you, that a work on
the evidences of the christian religion is not a little wanted in many
parts in this country, as there are many who are verging towards, or
are already gone into, deism. On this account, as well as on others, it
behoves the friends of Christianity to bestir themselves in behalf of
South America. The present is a very interesting and also a very critical
period for this country. Much, very much, may be done at present, through
prudent and zealous means, to instruct and confirm the wavering, and even
perhaps to bring back those who have apostatized from the faith. If these
measures were connected with means of instruction, as far as can be done,
regarding the true principles and practices of Christianity, as taught
in the Holy Scriptures, a very plentiful harvest, through the blessing
of God, might be reaped. If it should please the Lord to spare me, and
to enable me to reach my native land, I trust I shall find many ready to
lend their aid towards such a sacred object.

P.S.—_26th November, 1824._—I have now disposed of 360 copies of the
New Testament in this city. May the Lord follow with his abundant
blessing this seed which has been sown, and cause it to bring forth a
hundred fold. To-day I set off for Popayan, and trust that _He_ who has
preserved me thus far, will continue to me his blessing to that place,
and thence onwards. I shall endeavour to drop a few seeds as I go along,
and pray that these may fall into good ground.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                            _Popayan, 1st January, 1825._

You will perceive, by the date of this letter, that it is a month later
than it ought to be, according to our epistolary agreement. You will not
wonder at this delay, when you consider that I am in the middle of a long
and incommodious journey. The day on which I should have written you, I
was travelling from Otabalo to Ibarra, and of course had neither leisure
nor convenience for conversing with you. I now seize the opportunity of a
few days rest which I enjoy in this city, to write you a few lines.

You will probably he expecting some account of the country in which I
now am, and through which I have lately passed. I shall endeavour to
satisfy your curiosity in some measure upon this point. I shall begin
with Guayaquil. That place contains from 12,000 to 15,000 inhabitants,
and is situated upon a river of the same name. There are regular tides
in the river opposite the town, twice in the 24 hours, and the same
also takes place for a considerable distance above the town. The spot
on which the town is built is very low, being only a very little higher
than the river at the time of high water. The weather here is very hot,
considerably more so than in Lima. This, together with a low and somewhat
marshy situation, makes the place unhealthy, particularly in the rainy
season. I could not help observing, however, during the short time I was
there, that the want of cleanliness in the streets, and on the banks of
the river, are circumstances which contribute, in my opinion, at least
one half to the unhealthiness of the town. This port is the place on the
Pacific which at present affords more articles of exportation than any
other, and every succeeding year will make it more so. The cocoa from
which the chocolate is made is the principal article, and of this several
ship-loads go annually to Europe, besides what is used in Peru, Chile,
&c. It is through this place that all the towns, as far as Quito, are
supplied with European goods, and through this place also should these
towns be supplied with the Holy Scriptures, and with other works which
may contribute to enlighten and to benefit them with respect to time and
to eternity. I have made arrangements there by which the Scriptures may
be supplied to these quarters in future.

The town of Guaranda is high up on the Andes, and within a few miles
of the great Chimborazo. It enjoys a temperate and healthy climate,
notwithstanding its proximity to the Equator. I need not state to you the
causes of this, as you are well aware of them. I may, however, say that
Chimborazo exerts a considerable influence in moderating the heat which
might be expected in this quarter. If you should ask me more particularly
what I think of the climate, I would say, judging from my own feelings,
that it is cold. So I felt it to be, but that arose partly from my having
just come from a very hot climate. It is curious to observe the different
feelings of two persons met together on the declivity of the mountains,
the one ascending from Guayaquil, and the other descending from Quito.
If you ask one of them regarding the climate, or weather, he says it is
very cold; and if you ask the other, he says it is very warm; and so
they respectively feel from the opposite climates they have come from.
Guaranda is situated on the western side of the western Cordillera of
the Andes. You will observe that the word _Andes_, is the general name
of all these mountains, and _Cordillera_ means the high ridge or line of
mountains running nearly north and south. There are two great cordilleras
which extend from Cuenca to about 100 miles to the north of Popayan. To
the south of Cuenca and to the north of the department of Popayan, one
of the Cordilleras disappears. In going from Guaranda to Riobamba, you
first ascend the western cordillera to the top. On this _top_ is the
_base_ of Chimborazo. The road is close along the base of the mountain
and you would think you could lay your hand upon it. From _this spot_ it
does not appear a very high mountain, and the reason is obvious, as this
spot itself is at a great elevation.[5] The whole of Chimborazo, except
perhaps, a few yards, is covered with snow—everlastingly covered. Having
reached this top, you see, for the first time, the eastern cordillera,
vying with the western in height. You then descend down till you come to
Riobamba, which is situated in a _level_ plain between the two ridges,
and at nearly an equal distance from both. The whole of my journey, from
leaving Riobamba till my arrival in this city, has been in this great
valley, between the two cordilleras of the Andes. In two days or three
after leaving this place, I will have to cross the eastern cordillera on
my way to Bogotá.

The two principal towns between Riobamba and Quito, are Ambato and
Tacunga, and of which I have spoken in my letters to Mr. B.; the former
may contain 5,000, and the latter 6,000. The greater part of this
population consists of Indians, who all speak the ancient Peruvian
language. The largest town in the whole of this extensive valley, between
the ridges of the Andes, is Quito. It is a city of 50,000 inhabitants
and upwards, and will not yield to any city in South America in point
of population, except to Lima and to Buenos Aires. Its public buildings
are much superior to those of the latter place, and not much inferior
to those of the former. Its site is unfavourable, as it is placed on an
uneven piece of ground.

In travelling from Quito to Popayan you experience a great variety of
climate. Sometimes you have the unmitigated heat of the torrid zone; at
another time you might imagine yourself in the neighbourhood of one of
the poles rather than the equator; and again at other times you have a
climate of the most delightful kind, equally removed from the extremes
of heat and of cold. One of the coldest nights I passed on the journey,
was within a few yards of the line. You will wonder, perhaps, at this
variety, but I will explain it to you. Here and there, during the whole
course of this long valley, from Cuenca to Popayan, you have, rising out
of the one cordillera or the other, an enormous snow-capped mountain.
It is evident that the cold reigns uninterrupted on these towering
summits, as the snow, its certain signal, is ever spread over them. Of
course when the wind blows from these, it temperates (or perhaps somewhat
more) the heat of the sun wherever it passes. Any place situated near
these mountains is necessarily temperate, or cold. The coldest place in
the whole road, is a place called Tiupuyo, some 20 miles south of Quito,
because there you have Cotopaxi on the one side, and right opposite on
the other you have Ilinisa, both of which are always covered with snow. I
have thus noticed to you the cause of the cold, and shall now point out
what is the cause of the heat in those places where its effects are most
felt. Wherever there is a deep valley with sloping mountains around, and
no towering summits covered with snow, for a considerable distance, there
you have a climate of the same kind as is met with in the same latitude
on the sea coast. As to the temperate places I have spoken of, they are
always to be met with in the absence of these snow-covered mountains
on the one hand and the deep valleys on the other. In these tracts the
climate is delightful in the extreme, all the year round. In none of
these parts have you Spring, Summer, Harvest, and Winter, but one uniform
temperature from one end of the year to the other. In most of these
places there are periodical times of rain, which form what they call
the Winter, whilst the dry season is called Summer. The farmer there
may sow when he chooses, and may have his harvest in any month of the
year; notwithstanding, however, there is some order attended to in this
respect, but it is not uniform in all places.

[5] The top of this ridge, or cordillera, cannot be less than 17,000 feet
above the level of the sea. On arriving at this height, I recollected
what I had often read of, that persons at great elevations felt much
difficulty in breathing. I resolved to try the correctness of these
accounts: and for this purpose, I alighted from my horse, and with a
heavy great-coat on, I walked with a quick pace for half an hour. The
result was, I felt not the slightest inconvenience in breathing.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                            _Bogotá, 8th February, 1825._

Since my last communication to you from Quito, I have had a long, and
by no means an agreeable journey. The distance from Quito to this place
is considerable, the roads are very bad, and in passing through one
district, there is no inconsiderable danger. On the 29th ultimo, I
arrived safely in this city, and now seize the first opportunity that
offers of writing you a few lines, to inform you of occurrences in these
parts since my last, of the 26th November.

I intimated to you in the letter last mentioned, that it was my intention
to drop a few seeds as I went along, or in other words, to endeavour to
circulate the sacred volume, as opportunities might offer, in the course
of my journey. I accordingly posted up my notices in those places, where
I stopped for half a day, or upwards. In these country villages a great
sale was not to be expected. The inhabitants are in general poor, and
very few of them are addicted to reading. Some copies, however, were thus
put into circulation, and in such places, and under such circumstances,
I always think much has been done if a kind of beginning has been made.
I shall, in a future communication, state to you the number sold in each
place, and the respective sums received since my leaving Lima. I would
give you this account now, were it not that the scantiness of my time at
present will not allow me to extract these notices from among my notes.
I have now disposed of _all_ the New Testaments I brought with me from
Lima, and those which I found awaiting me in Guayaquil. I bless the Lord
for having counselled me to undertake this journey, and thus to put
into circulation a considerable number of copies of his holy word, and
which would not likely have been accomplished, but by means of making a
complete tour through these quarters. I have thus cause of gratitude to
Him who distributeth his favours to whom he will, for having honoured me
with a share of this angel-work, of communicating the revelation of God
to man. I shall be glad also to know, that the plan I have taken meets
with the approbation of the Committee of the British and Foreign Bible
Society. I thought much about this journey before undertaking it, and
prayed much to the Lord to counsel me in regard to it. And now, looking
back over the road I have travelled, and reflecting on the number of
copies of the word of life, now in the hands of many people who had never
before seen it, I feel my heart drawn out in thanksgiving and praise for
all the way by which the Lord hath led me.

My labours in distributing the sacred volume on this journey must now
terminate, because I have no more to distribute. In the multitude of my
thoughts within me upon setting off from Lima, it occurred to me that I
might, after reaching this place, extend my journey in your service to
Guatemala, and from thence overland to Mexico. Two objects I had in view
in reference to this; the one was the circulation of the Scriptures,
and the other was the procuring translations of the New Testament into
the native languages of those parts. Of this latter object I wrote you
some time ago. This intended journey, however, must now be given up,
for various reasons. The first is, because I have no more copies of the
Scriptures to distribute; the second is, because I feel doubtful if it
would meet with your approbation to incur the expense of travelling
through those parts, with the single object of procuring the translations
referred to; the third reason is, the happy change which has taken place
in Peru, in the termination of the war there, and which induces me to
visit England as early as possible, that I may again return to Lima
without loss of time, in order to carry on the work of the Lord there,
according to the grace and strength he may be pleased to afford me. I
trust in the Lord that we shall have an opportunity of seeing each other
face to face, before many months elapse, that we may talk over all the
doings of the Lord, in making his word to circulate in this country and
in every place, and that we may make arrangements for benefiting South
America yet more extensively.

I have spoken of the _termination_ of the war in Peru, and this to me is
no small subject of thanksgiving; for the deliverance of the country from
the Spanish yoke, and the rapid progress of the Lord’s work, are closely
identified. I wrote you from Guayaquil some months ago respecting this
identification. It was then I gave you an account of the battle of Junin,
and of the very important effects that followed. I then also ventured to
speak of what were likely to be the ultimate and no very distant results
of that battle. All these things the Lord hath now brought about, in
scattering those who delight in war and oppression, and in commanding
the destroying sword to return into its scabbard.—Rest and peace to this
destroying instrument—and for ever! May it never more be drawn in this
country, to cut in sunder afresh the peace and the progress of man! I
send you an account of this late event in Peru, which I think will prove
interesting to you and to your friends.

I expected to find, on my arrival here, a large supply of Spanish New
Testaments, which I thought you would have found an opportunity of
forwarding to some correspondent in this quarter. I have spoken with
Mr. Henderson, the British Consul General here, upon the subject, and
he informs me that there are neither Spanish Bibles nor New Testaments
in this city, and that there is a demand for them. He also informs me,
that he wrote about three months ago to Mr. Dowson, a correspondent of
his, requesting him to forward some to this place. You will please make
inquiry of Mr. D., who lives in Welbeck Street, if he has sent any; and
in the event of none having been sent, have the goodness to forward to
this city, as early as possible, a supply of each of your editions of the
Spanish Scriptures. I have talked with Mr. Henderson upon this subject,
and think he will be a very suitable person to manage your concerns
here, and to correspond with you. He takes a particular interest in this
matter, and desires me to assure you of his readiness to do all that lies
in his power to forward your good work.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                           _Bogotá, 25th February, 1825._

I have noticed to you, more than once, the very favourable reception
given to the Scriptures in these parts. I am now to state to you an
exception, and it is in a quarter where it should not have been
found. The only person whom I found unfriendly to the circulation of
the Scriptures without notes, in the whole of the journey from Lima
to Bogotá, was the Bishop of Popayan. I have stated his opposition in
gentle terms, for truth requires it. I heard, soon after putting up the
advertisements for the sale of the New Testaments, that the Bishop had
spoken against the reading of them. I called upon him to know whether
it was so or not, and to learn what were his objections. I had visited
him before, and had had a visit from him in return, so that we were, on
this second visit, on terms of a friendly intercourse, and we therefore
entered freely into the subject of the sale and distribution of the
Scriptures. I mentioned to him what I had heard, and inquired whether
I had been correctly informed. He then told me the whole of what had
occurred upon the subject. He said, a person who had bought one of the
New Testaments, brought it to him and asked his opinion as to his using
it. The person was a priest, and he named him to me. The Bishop, upon
his opinion being asked, rose and brought the Acts of the Council of
Trent, and pointed out to the priest the article there, prohibiting
the use of the Scriptures without notes. He concluded, however, by
telling the priest that _he_ might keep his New Testament and use it.
This, said the Bishop, is all that occurred upon this matter. He said
farther, that it was not his intention to oppose the circulation of
the New Testaments in any other way. If any person chose to buy them,
he would not interfere; but if any one should ask his opinion upon the
matter, he would refer him to the same article, as his duty required him
to do. I said that I understood the article in question was as he had
stated it, but that when I considered how many among all ranks of the
catholic clergy made no account of that article, but freely encouraged
the circulation of the Scriptures among their flocks, I was inclined to
think that the article was qualified by something subsequent to it, or
that it was not generally considered as in force. He replied to this,
that there was nothing subsequent to alter the force of that article,
but rather to strengthen it, and that whatever others did, he considered
his duty to be, to follow the rules of the church in that and in all
such matters, as every good Catholic ought to do. I said that I saw the
force of what he said, considering what were the principles of his faith.
I added, that notwithstanding his reasons, I could not but be sorry to
see any opposition to the circulation of the Holy Scriptures, a book
which God had graciously given to all, and which should, of course, be
studied by all. I observed, also, that I was fully persuaded that very
great advantages would arise from a general reading of the word of God,
and from these considerations I conceived it to be my duty to put them
into the hands of all, and to call upon all to read them with serious
attention. “Amen,” replied the Bishop, “I also am of the same opinion.
I am sure that it would be advantageous to all to read the Scriptures,
but then let them be read with the necessary directions. If Bibles and
New Testaments were to come here with the notes, I would be the first
to promote their circulation.” Our conversation was extended a good
deal further upon this subject, and embraced the usual topics of this
question, but which it is unnecessary here to repeat.

I am labouring what I can to establish a Bible Society here, and it is
that alone which keeps me longer in this city. I am not yet sure whether
I shall succeed or not, but my next letter will inform you.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                               _Bogotá, 1st March, 1825._

My last letter to you was written from Popayan on the 1st of January. I
informed you at that time of some of the circumstances that occurred to
me in the way, and gave you some account of the peculiar situation of the
country from Guayaquil to Quito. I shall now resume this description,
which I was obliged to break off abruptly in my last. I remained about
three weeks in Quito, experiencing the kindest attentions from many
friends. The remembrance of my short stay in that place will always be
agreeable. Thanks be to God for providing me friends in every quarter,
and may they all be fully rewarded for all their kindness. I had several
very interesting conversations with the Rector, and with some of the
Professors of the College in that city, upon religious subjects; and one
of the Professors who understands English begged me to let him have,
at any price, two works I carried with me. These were Jones’s Biblical
Cyclopedia and Stewart’s Philosophy of the Human Mind. He said that if
I could not spare both works, he particularly wished for the first, as
being in the line of his profession as a clergyman, and because he wished
to examine the subject of religion, not merely from their own writers,
but from ours also. I let him have both of them, with which he was much
gratified. These gentlemen belonging to the College, whom I have just
referred to, manifested an excellent and liberal spirit in regard to the
improvements necessary in their mode of education in the seminary to
which they belong. There are about 300 students in this college.

Nothing very material occurred in the journey from Quito until arriving
at the province of Pastos. This province has been for a long time past
in a very unsettled state. It has repeatedly raised the standard of
rebellion against the existing Government, and has as often been reduced
to subjection by the force of arms. At each time it has suffered
severely, and at present it resembles a deserted country; the finest
fields and pastures are met with, without a single head of cattle. This
province is still but ill at rest, and may be said to be subdued and
reduced, rather than tranquillized. A proof of that is to be found in the
banditti which exist in it. At the time we passed, there were three or
four of these parties in different places, and one of them consisted of
one hundred men. On arriving at Tulcan, which is about three days journey
from the city of Pasto, the capital of the province, we had to take with
us a guard of ten men. We passed from Tulcan to Pasto, without meeting
with any enemy. But from what we heard afterwards, we may consider
ourselves as having made a providential escape, as there was a party of
16 men seen in these quarters, a few days after we passed. In the city of
Pasto, there is constantly kept a body of about a thousand men; some of
these are employed in searching out and in persecuting these banditti;
and some of them are employed in escorting the mail and travellers
from that to the province of Popayan. The Governor of Pasto gave us an
escort of forty men, and which was judged necessary from the general
state of the province, and from a recent occurrence. This occurrence was
the assault and murder of a merchant travelling from Popayan to Pasto,
notwithstanding his having an escort of twelve men with him. The soldiers
we brought with us behaved very well; we kept a good look out, and
mounted our centinels every night, particularly in that spot where the
murder was committed, and where we passed the night. Had we fallen in
with any of these parties we would have been hardly put to it, and had we
been worsted, we should certainly not have escaped with life. From this,
however, and from every other danger on the journey, the Lord delivered
us. For all these mercies, I feel my heart stirred up with gratitude and
thanksgiving, and I feel a desire more than ever to devote my whole life
to the service of God, and to the service of mankind.

I have already stated to you the unquiet state of the Province of Pastos,
and its desolateness in consequence. The City of Pasto, the capital,
affords also a melancholy proof of this desolation. Its population has
been reduced from 15,000, to, perhaps, not more than 4000, and in every
street you meet with numbers of houses waste and uninhabited, with all
the wood of the doors and windows torn out, and which was used by the
military for firewood. You are not to consider this revolutionary spirit
as extending throughout the country, but as confined exclusively to that
province.

Upon my arriving at Popayan, I found there an English medical gentleman,
of the name of Wallis, who has been upwards of twenty years in the
country. Dr. Wallis shewed me much kindness; he was very friendly to the
circulation of the Scriptures, and aided me therein as much as he could.
The number sold there was very small, considering the size of the place,
on account of some little opposition from the Bishop, of which I have
spoken in one of my letters to Mr. B. The topography of Popayan is worth
noticing. It is situated in a very large plain, called the valley of
Cauca. It is by far the largest plain in those quarters, the Cordilleras
separating farther from each other there than in any other part, and the
space between them is, in general, even, or nearly so. It is watered
by a beautiful river, called Cauca. The population in the whole valley
is exceedingly small, considering its size and fertility. There is
little doubt, I think, but it will one day become a place of great
population and importance. Its climate is healthy and delightful, with
an everlasting summer, and its productions, taking one part with another
include every thing, from wheat to the sugar-cane. There is no part of
Colombia which I have yet seen, nor, perhaps, of America, in which I
could wish to live in preference to Popayan.

No part of South America, I believe, has felt more severely the effects
of the revolutionary war than the city of Popayan and its neighbourhood.
The city was taken and retaken, I believe, fourteen times, and there
is scarcely an individual in it who has not a long tale of woes to
relate, either of himself or of his friends. It has now enjoyed peace
for some time, and is beginning to regain its former state, but years
of tranquillity are necessary to restore it fully. There is a mint here,
which coins annually about one million of dollars, of the gold of Chocó,
and from the mines of the province of Popayan. There is also coined
there twenty thousand dollars of silver. The Director of the Mint is a
gentleman of the name of Pombo, a literary man, and who has published two
or three elementary works for schools, of considerable value.

From Popayan to Bogotá there are two roads across the cordillera, but
the one to the south is the best. This is called the Pass of Guanacos,
and lies nearly east of Popayan; the other is called Quindiu, and lies
to the north. The cold on the top of the mountain is generally pretty
keen. The ascent from Popayan is gradual, but the descent on the other
side is rapid, and you pass quickly from a very cold climate to a hot
one. It is a frightful road in some places. You have frequently to
ascend and descend very steep places on this side of the mountain, from
the many deep glens made by the rivers which you pass. You may be said
to be riding up stairs and down stairs in these places, and in several
of them it is literally so. The mules are wonderfully steady, being
accustomed to these roads, so that they very seldom slip. Some years
ago an Italian doctor, passing that way, was so frightened with the
going down these stairs, that he mounted his mule the reverse way, with
his face backwards, and then leaned him down flat upon the mule. This
attitude, together with his three-cocked hat and queue, afforded no
little diversion to the muleteers who conducted him. This kind of road
continues till you come to the town of La Plata, and after that you have
a much better road, the greater part of which is in the great valley of
the river Magdalena, and one of its contributaries. The usual stages or
places where you hire mules, on the way between Popayan and Bogotá are,
La Plata, Neiva, and La Mesa. In most places the mules are scarce, on
account of the great number of these animals destroyed by the war. At
proper distances on the road there are houses called Tambos, which are
the inns of the place. These houses consist of a roof erected upon poles,
and without any walls, so that they afford shelter from the rain, but not
from the wind and the cold. The town of La Plata is pleasantly situated
on the banks of a river of the same name, on the first lowlands after
getting out from the great mountains. There is a great deal of fertile
land about the place, affording a great variety of productions, including
the sugar-cane, but these fertile lands are almost all lying waste. The
river La Plata, about ten miles below the town, joins the river Paez, a
river on the banks of which we travelled a good deal, and across which
we passed repeatedly. The La Plata and the Paez are nearly of the same
size, and make a fine stream when united. When these two streams unite,
the whole goes by the name of Paez. After travelling two days on the
banks of the Paez, we saw it fall into the Magdalena, and lose its name
there.—From the town of La Plata the heat begins, and when you reach the
Magdalena it is very great, and continues so all along the banks of the
river. This is decidedly the hottest place I ever was in. The thermometer
every day rose to 97½, and remained there two or three hours together.
I was in a constant state of perspiration during the 24 hours, except,
perhaps, from 2 o’clock in the morning till 8. This was the only respite,
if respite it might be called. At Neiva we left the road and the mules,
and took to the river, down which we went for some days. From Neiva
to Honda the river is navigable in what are called balsas. The balsa
consists of long poles or trunks of trees laid close to each other, with
others laid over then cross-wise, and again, above this row, or above
an additional one, is a kind of flooring, made of the bamboo flattened
out. The wood of which these balsas are made is exceedingly light, and
very well adapted for the use. In this vessel there is not a single nail
used, nor a single rope. The poles are tied together with what are called
bejucos, which is a species of plant that grows abundantly in these
quarters, and resembles a rope in length and thickness. With these,
which are of all sizes, the whole work of nails and ropes is performed.
Over the balsa is raised a roof, thatched with what the wood affords.
This protects the luggage as well as the passengers from the rain. In
this rude vessel we passed some days and some nights, sailing when we
had light, and at night fastened by one of these ropes to a tree. The
river was very shallow at the time we passed, so that we frequently got
aground in the middle of the stream, at which time our boatmen, or bogas
as they are called, had to get into the water and push us along. There
was another evil of a worse kind which we had to encounter, namely,
the trunks of trees sunk deep in the bottom of the river, sometimes
appearing above the water, and sometimes not. It requires a good deal of
dexterity to steer among these at times, as the current perhaps draws you
straight to them. Against one of these sunken trees we drove one day, and
fortunately broke it with the blow. The shock pitched our bogas into the
river in a moment, but they were immediately again on board. This blow,
however, broke some of our wooden ropes, and we were under the necessity
of fastening ourselves to a tree till we got repaired. The bogas got
into the wood, and got, quite at hand, other ropes of a similar kind,
cut them down, repaired the bark, and in an hour’s time we were again
at sea. The general landing place for travellers for Bogotá, is not as
far down as Honda, but at a place called Fusagasugá. Here you leave the
river, and begin to ascend the hills, and afterwards the mountains, and
sensibly to change your climate from extreme heat to temperature, but a
temperature which, under these circumstances, feels quite cold. On the
last day’s travel to this place, we began early in the morning to ascend
the mountain by a steep and rugged road, closely wooded on both sides.
We kept ascending till about noon, when we reached the top, and the wood
disappeared. Here I expected we would have had, as usual, to descend
again, but quite otherwise. On the top of this mountain is a large
beautiful plain, and at the farther end of it stands the city of Bogotá.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                               _Bogotá, 5th April, 1825._

I had the pleasure of writing you on the 25th of February last, and of
giving you an account of those places, in which the Holy Scriptures
were distributed in the course of my journey. I noticed to you at
the same time, the only instance I met with of opposition to the
circulation of the Scriptures without notes. I also informed you of my
endeavours to bring about the establishment of a Bible Society in this
city. By the last packet for England, I sent you a copy of No. 29 of
“The Constitutional,” a newspaper published in this place, and which
contained an advertisement relative to the subject in question. By that
advertisement, you would see that something was doing in the matter,
and from the respectability of the gentlemen who are there mentioned,
you would perceive that we had met with some valuable supporters, and
that there was a prospect held forth of succeeding in this object. I
now send you Nos. 30, 31, and 32, of the same paper, which will point
out to you the different steps we have taken, and you will be able to
notice also the progressive encouragement we obtained. You will perceive
by the two last numbers that our Society at length obtained a fair and
firm establishment. I say a _fair_ establishment, because the whole of
our transactions were done in open day, and because all who wished to
state their objections were not only permitted, but encouraged to do so.
Our meeting on the 24th was very well attended, and consisted of the
most respectable class of the community in this city, both clergy and
laity. We had, on that occasion, a very warm and interesting discussion
of the point in question. A professor in one of the colleges was the
first who spoke, a man of very respectable talents, and commendable for
his Christian virtues, but withal full of Catholic prejudices. This
gentleman opposed our object, as being contrary to the acts of the
general councils of the church, and as being injudicious and hurtful,
especially under present circumstances. The next who spoke was the
very respectable rector of the principal college of this city. In this
gentleman we met with a warm friend to our Institution, and we had the
pleasure of hearing him reply to the objections of the preceding speaker.
Both these individuals are clergymen. The next who spoke was also a
clergyman, a well known and eloquent preacher in this place, a man full
of zeal, and who adorns his profession by a very exemplary conduct. This
gentleman opposed our plans, as the first speaker had done, and even went
farther, and said, that under existing circumstances, he considered it
improper to have a general circulation of the Scriptures, even with the
notes affixed. This last observation relieved us a little, in respect to
the opposition we met with from this individual, as it was plain that, as
a Catholic, he proved too much, and thus overshot his mark, and injured
his cause, inasmuch as he carried things farther than either the Pope or
the Council of Trent. This ended our opposition, or at least finished
the list of our opponents, for no other individual present spoke on that
side of the question. The gentleman, however, who had spoken first, was
so full upon his subject, that he rose again and again to advocate his
cause, until it was necessary to reply to him from the chair as to
order, and to the giving an opportunity to others to speak as well as
himself. Several gentlemen spoke in succession, and warmly advocated the
cause of the Bible Society in general, and pointed out to the meeting
the consistency of the object of the Society to be established, with the
laws and customs of the people of Colombia, and stating at the same time
the great advantages that would certainly arise to their country, from
a general circulation and reading of the word of God, not encumbered
with notes, but in its own native simplicity, as it was delivered by
the Almighty to mankind. The two Ministers of Government who were
present, Mr. Gual, and Mr. Castillo, very ably, and at considerable
length, defended and supported the object of the Society, and pointed
out that there was nothing of a clandestine nature in the establishment
of this Institution, but that it had the full and open approbation of
the Executive Government of the country, and also of the ecclesiastical
authorities.

After our plans respecting the Society had thus been clearly and openly
stated to the assembly, and nothing kept back, and after we had heard
all that was to be said in support of its adoption in Colombia, and also
the objections urged against it, the sense of the meeting was taken
by vote. The question put amounted to this: Is it compatible with our
laws and customs, as Colombians, and as of the Roman Catholic church,
to establish a Colombian Bible Society in this capital as a national
Society, and whose only object is to print and circulate the Holy
Scriptures, in approved versions, in our native tongue; and does such a
Society meet with the approbation of this assembly? This question was
triumphantly carried in the affirmative, and almost unanimously.

I need not tell you how much pleasure I enjoyed in witnessing this
triumph, nor how many anxieties previously entertained respecting the
result of these meetings, were at once laid asleep, or were changed into
that tranquillity, that peace and joy, which arise from seeing the name
of the Lord glorified among men. I know you will participate in the same
feelings, and will hail the establishment of this Society as a new era
in South America. See here one of the happy effects of the political
revolution! and it is but one of many, some of which are already visible,
and the rest come on in their natural order and beauty. Blessed be God,
who doeth all things according to the counsel of his own will, who maketh
the wrath of man to praise him, and who in due time saith to the wars,
as to the winds and the waves, peace, be still! and thus leaving us in
the midst of the calm, to exclaim, Who is a God like unto our God, who
bringeth order out of confusion, and who maketh waters to spring up in
the wilderness, and streams to flow in the desert.

Our last meeting to _establish_ the Society was held yesterday afternoon,
and consisted of those who had subscribed as members of this Institution.
The President, Vice Presidents, the Treasurer, and Secretaries, were
chosen at this meeting, and you will find their names in the paper,
No. 32, I now send you. These gentlemen, you will see, are of the most
respectable inhabitants of this place, and this gives at once a tone
and a stability to our Society. Besides the preceding office-bearers,
there was chosen a Committee, consisting of twenty, one half clergymen
and the other half laymen. The gentlemen elected into the Committee, are
also of the same highly respectable class as those whose names you have
mentioned in the paper. It is intended to publish, as soon as possible,
an account of the origin and actual state of the Society. Along with this
will be published the Rules and Regulations adopted, the names of the
office-bearers and committee, and a list of subscribers. To all of which
will be added a short address to the people of South America, upon the
object and the advantages of the Society. I have much pleasure in saying
that the subscriptions already amount to 1380 dollars. I should not omit
to mention to you, that all the meetings upon this matter have been held
in the chapel of the University, which is in the principal Dominican
Convent of this city. The Rector of the University and the Prior of the
Convent have been and are our very warm friends and supporters. With the
former the subscription paper lies, and is daily obtaining additional
subscribers. One of our secretaries is also a Dominican Friar, is
secretary to the University, and formerly filled the office of secretary
in the district tribunal of the Inquisition of this quarter. It is this
gentleman who has written all the articles in the Newspaper about the
Society, and what you read in the English part is merely a translation
from the same article in Spanish, as written by him.[6]

I have now to say a few words respecting the conduct on this occasion
of Mr. Gual, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and now President
of the Bible Society of Colombia. I wish to speak of the conduct of
this gentleman in the highest terms, and in doing so, feel that I am
not using the voice of flattery and adulation, but complying with the
precept of rendering to every one his due. It is an act of injustice to
withhold the praise that is due to any one, when a proper occasion offers
of mentioning it. I had occasion to call upon him at different times,
in regard to the preliminary steps for setting the Society on foot, and
notwithstanding the hurry of business in his public situation, I always
found him ready to spend a few minutes in listening to the propositions
made to him as to our mode of acting in this matter. He also cheerfully
attended and presided at all our meetings, and constantly defended, with
much judgment and eloquence, the glorious work of circulating the Holy
Scriptures in their natural beauty, in every corner of his native land,
over all this continent, and finally throughout the world.

Mr. Castillo, the Minister of Finance, also warmly advocated our cause,
and these two gentlemen, as well as the Minister of the Interior, have
given 50 dollars each by way of donation, and are, besides, annual
subscribers of 20 dollars each. The Vice-President has also given us a
donation and his subscription of 24 dollars.

I have much pleasure in noticing to you that Colonel Hamilton, H. B.
M. Commissioner to this Government, and Mr. Henderson, the British
Consul-General, have lent the influence of their names and of their
purses to the forwarding of our Society. Colonel Campbell also, the
British Chargé d’Affaires, just arrived in time to be present at our
last meeting, and both he and Mr. Henderson were chosen members of the
committee.

I have requested Mr. Gual to write a few lines to Lord Teignmouth, by way
of introducing our new Society to a friendly correspondence with that
great and venerable Society over which he has so long presided, with so
much honour to himself, and with much advantage to mankind. I expect Mr.
Gual’s letter to-morrow, and shall forward it with this. He is going
also to write a few lines in order to begin a correspondence with the
American Bible Society.

I have now been detained in this city considerably longer than I expected
upon my arrival here, but I have the satisfaction of thinking, that my
stay has been prolonged in the forwarding of a good work. I now set off
immediately, and expect soon to have the pleasure of seeing the friends
of the Redeemer’s cause in the United States; and not very long after, if
the Lord will, I hope once more to behold my native land, and to salute
there my friends and brethren in Christ Jesus.

[6] These articles from the newspaper are added at the end of this
letter, as descriptive of the state of the country in regard to these
matters.

    _Articles regarding the Formation of a Bible Society in Bogotá,
    extracted from “The Constitutional,” a weekly Newspaper
    published in that City, in Spanish and English._

                                                _17th March, 1825._

    On the 15th instant, at half-past five in the afternoon, a
    public meeting took place in the Chapel of the University of
    this city, at which were present Dr. Pedro Gual, Secretary
    of State for Foreign Affairs; Dr. Antonio Malo, Member of
    the Senate; Dr. Joaquin Gomez and Dr. Mariano Miño, Members
    of the Chamber of Representatives; Dr. Jose Maria Estevez,
    Rector of the College of San Bartolomé; Father Joaquin Galvez,
    Rector of the University; Father Mariano Garnica, Prior of the
    Dominican Convent; Dr. Nicolas Quebedo; and the Secretary of
    the University. The meeting was assembled at the instance of
    Mr. Thomson, Agent of the British and Foreign Bible Society,
    with the view of establishing a Bible Society in Colombia.
    The Rules for the proposed Society were read, and after some
    observations from Sr. Gual, it was resolved unanimously to call
    a general meeting on Sunday next, the 20th instant, at four
    o’clock in the afternoon, in the same place, in order to take
    into consideration the advantages or inconveniences of such an
    establishment in Colombia; to obtain the general consent for
    the incorporation of a Society similar to that which has been
    the source of so many spiritual benefits to the human race in
    Europe, Asia, and Africa; and of which a correct idea will be
    given to the public by means of the press. In the mean time,
    it is distinctly stated, that the sole and exclusive object
    of this Society is the dissemination of the Holy Scriptures
    throughout the world.

                                                _24th March, 1825._

    On Sunday last, the 20th instant, the meeting took place
    which was advertised in the CONSTITUTIONAL of last week,
    for the purpose of establishing this valuable and important
    Institution. Upon this occasion eloquent and appropriate
    speeches were delivered by Sres. Gual, Castillo, and Herrera;
    and, after a debate of considerable length, it was agreed to
    convene a general meeting, by means of circulars, for this day,
    (Thursday,) at four o’clock in the afternoon. The principal
    object of this invitation is to place the basis of the Society
    on the most permanent and respectable foundation; to hear the
    opinions, and be benefited by the judgment of the gentlemen
    who may assemble; and to determine definitively upon what
    may appear most suitable and in conformity to the state and
    relations of Colombia. By the blessing of Heaven we hope to see
    accomplished the desires of those who have devoted their wisdom
    and love of their country to the promotion of so benevolent an
    undertaking.—We will have the pleasure of publishing a report
    of the speeches delivered on the occasion, also the rules and
    regulations of the Society, together with the objections that
    may be urged against it.

                                                _31st March, 1825._

    At length the setting on foot of this establishment has been
    obtained, and its advantages will soon be known to those who
    are alike the friends of the religion of Jesus Christ, and
    of the true enlightening of the people. Endeavours were made
    to bring together all the principal persons of this city, by
    issuing upwards of 300 cards of invitation; and notwithstanding
    the smallness of the Chapel of the University, there assembled
    in it two-thirds of those invited. It is our intention to
    publish the speeches then made, together with the discourses
    offered us by some gentlemen who had not time to deliver them
    upon that occasion. This we promise to do with the greatest
    correctness possible. The opposition which has been made to
    this beneficent Institution by sinister interpretations of its
    object, is not to be wondered at, nor that strife of opinion
    which has already been manifested upon this important subject.
    It is, however, strange that any public writer should have said
    that it would be better to print two millions of copies of the
    Catechism, (the only book of instruction afforded to the people
    by our old oppressors,) than to print and circulate the Holy
    Bible. It is not suitable in itself, nor is it consistent with
    our upright motives to excite contention. The exclusive object
    of the Bible Society which has been established in Colombia
    is, to facilitate to all Colombians the reading of the divine
    word, in our own native tongue, from approved versions, such
    as that of Father Scio, or that of the celebrated Torres Amat,
    which has just been published in Madrid with all the necessary
    licences: and this object will be accomplished without in any
    degree infringing upon the Articles of the Council of Trent.
    If this plan draw forth opposition—if this object is capable
    of producing bitter and extemporaneous censures, then we will
    be under the necessity of classing the people of Colombia with
    the most uncivilized people of the world. This Bible Society
    has been established with the consent and approbation of
    the most distinguished persons, actually entrusted with the
    Executive Government of the Republic, and the Ecclesiastical
    Government of the Archbishopric, to whom it belongs exclusively
    and without dispute to watch over the spiritual and temporal
    happiness of the people, and whose fidelity none without
    injustice can call in question.

                                                 _7th April, 1825._

    On the 4th current there assembled in the Chapel of the
    University, those Foreigners and Colombians who have so
    generously contributed to the formation of this establishment,
    and whose names will be furnished upon another occasion.
    Rules and Regulations for this Society were read, and were
    unanimously approved of as the laws of its organization.
    In conformity to these Rules, the subscribers proceeded to
    the election of President, Vice-Presidents, Treasurer, and
    Secretaries, when the following gentlemen were duly elected.

                              _President._

    Don PEDRO GUAL, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

                         _First Vice-President._

    Don JOSE MARIA CASTILLO, Minister of Finance.

                        _Second Vice-President._

    Doctor JOSE MARIA ESTEVEZ, Prebendary, and Rector of the
    College of St. Bartholomew.

                         _Third Vice-President._

    Doctor JUAN FERNANDEZ DE SOTOMAYOR, Rector of the College del
    Rosario.

                              _Treasurer._

    Don JOSE SANS DE SANTA MARIA, Senator, and Comptroller of the
    department of Cundinamarca.

                             _Secretaries._

    Father ANTONIO MARCO GUTIERRES, Secretary of the University.

    Doctor R. N. CHEYNE.

    In the same manner the members present proceeded to vote for
    a Committee consisting of twenty individuals, one half of
    whom are Clergymen. The Society wished to place among its
    principal office-bearers the virtuous and worthy Governor of
    the Archbishoprick; but this gentleman, with his accustomed
    moderation, declined this honour, and very properly noticed,
    that the third article of the Rules reserved to the Ordinary
    of each diocese, the right of examining the edition of the
    Holy Scriptures that should be published by the Society, in
    conformity with the decrees of the councils; and that the
    exercise of this power would prevent him, as Governor of this
    diocese, from accepting of the honour that this respectable
    Society wished to confer upon him.

    It was then resolved on to print, as soon as possible, in the
    form of a pamphlet, the speeches made at the last meeting,
    the Rules and Regulations of the Institution, a list of
    subscribers, and the transactions of the Society. It was also
    agreed upon that the advertisements of the Society should
    be made through “the CONSTITUTIONAL,” in consequence of its
    Editors having cheerfully employed their pages in promoting
    this Society. Finally, it was agreed on that the Subscription
    List should lie with the Rector of the University, at whose
    apartments all who wish to subscribe, may have an opportunity
    of doing so, on any day from eight to nine o’clock in the
    morning.

       *       *       *       *       *

_To the Committee of the British and Foreign School Society._[7]

                                                _London, 25th May, 1826._

Gentlemen,

Agreeable to your wishes I sit down to give you a sketch of the progress,
and of the actual state of education in South America. I shall begin at
Buenos Aires, and shall take the different states in the order in which
I travelled through them. When I left Buenos Aires, in May 1821, there
were eight schools for boys in that city, supported by the magistrates,
and all of them conducted, more or less, on your system. There were, I
think, about as many more schools in the small villages around the city.
These were also under the care of the magistrates, but had not been put
upon your system at the time mentioned. I had visited some of them for
the purpose of organizing them upon this plan, but the never-ending
revolutions of that unhappy period, prevented the proper measures from
being carried into effect for their improvement.

Upon my leaving Buenos Aires, the schools were put under the direction
of a very respectable clergyman, who, I thought, would conduct them
with much advantage, but, from his not being well acquainted with the
system, or from his being peculiar in the application of it, the schools
did not improve, but rather grew worse. This state of things lasted
for several months, until the Society, which had been formed some time
before my leaving that place, becoming re-organized, and arousing from
its lethargy, began to take a particular interest in forwarding education
according to this system. Much was done through this means; and, I am
happy to say, that I have lately heard that the Society continues its
useful exertions, and is likely to become more efficient from year to
year. As you wish me to mention some individual or individuals in the
different countries in South America with whom you could advantageously
correspond in furtherance of your Christian object, universal education,
I give you here the name of the Secretary to the above-mentioned
Society, Don Bartolomé Muñoz. This individual is a clergyman of great
respectability, he possesses a spirit of active benevolence, and is a
warm friend to education. With this gentleman you may correspond with
great advantage to the furtherance of your object; and I am sure it will
afford much satisfaction to the individual mentioned, and to the rest of
the Society, to hear from you, and to labour with you in this good cause.

I am not sure whether I mentioned to you in my letters from Buenos Aires,
the circumstances of the meetings at the first formation of this Society,
being held in the chief Franciscan convent of that city. This is worth
mentioning, as it shows the liberality of priests and friars on the
subject of education. The Provincial of the order, Don Hipólito Soler,
lived in this convent, and was very friendly indeed to our object. The
uniform kindness and courtesy which I experienced in my many calls upon
him in his cell, I shall never forget. The Prior of the convent was also
very friendly. To the list of our excellent friends among the priests,
I must not omit the highly respected Dean of Buenos Aires, Don Diego de
Zavaleta. The nephew of this gentleman, Don Ramon Anchorez, was also
a very particular friend, and often encouraged me to go forward when
obstacles lay in the way.

I have mentioned the labours of the Society in promoting Schools
in that city. I must also mention, and very particularly, that the
interest taken by the government, under the direction of Don Bernardino
Rivadavia, greatly contributed to carry forward this noble object. The
labours of the gentleman now mentioned, in instructing his countrymen
in true political wisdom, by precept and by example, and his exertions
in forwarding the cause of knowledge and general education, have mainly
contributed to give to Buenos Aires, (what it indisputably enjoys)
the first rank among the new American states. His name will ever be
associated with the happiest part of the revolution of that country; and
he will long be looked upon as its best benefactor. Accounts have just
reached London, that this gentleman has been recently elected President
of the United Provinces of the Rio de la Plata, an honour justly due
to him as the regenerator of their independence of Spain, and of their
dependance upon each other. We may, I think, fairly augur, that much
good will be done in the advancement of education by this individual
throughout the various provinces of the Union, at the head of which he is
now placed. I think a letter of congratulation from the Society is justly
due to him, and, from what I know of his sentiments, I have no doubt of
his readily acceding to any plans the Society might suggest for the
establishing of schools throughout the provinces.

Through the means above stated, the number of schools has greatly
increased in Buenos Aires since I left it. The Rev. Mr. Armstrong, in a
letter lately received by the Bible Society, reckons them to amount to
about _one hundred_, and thinks they may contain about _five thousand_
scholars. In the letter now referred to, Mr. Armstrong states, that he
had presented 500 New Testaments to these schools on the part of the
British and Foreign Bible Society, and he expresses a hope that this
precious volume is likely to be generally used in all the schools before
long.

At the time I left Buenos Aires, there was a very good girls’ school,
on the British system, containing 120 scholars. I have not heard
particularly of this school since that time, but hope it continues to
prosper as it then did. The person who organized this school was Don José
Catalá, a native of Spain, and a zealous promoter of education. This
gentleman was the first who studied the system at our schools in Buenos
Aires. He was afterwards appointed to be master of the central school,
and continued in that situation until a few weeks before I left that
place.

I mentioned to you, in some of my letters, that I had paid a visit to
Monte Video, where I was kindly received by the first ecclesiastic of
that place, Don Damaso Antonio de Larañaga, a priest of a liberal and
enlightened mind, and a friend to education. This gentleman laid the
subject of the establishment of schools on the British system before
the magistrates, and, in consequence, I was authorized to send a master
to them, who was to receive a salary of 1200 dollars a-year, whilst
engaged in establishing and superintending the schools. The person most
qualified for this undertaking was Don José Catalá, already mentioned.
He was, accordingly, sent there with a supply of the necessary articles
for making a commencement. I received, whilst in South America, different
letters respecting his progress, which was at first slow on account of
the war in which that place was involved, and the scarcity of funds
consequent upon it. Afterwards he was enabled to get on better. The last
letter I had from him is encouraging, of which I shall give an extract:—

“The school which I formed here has produced upwards of eighty children
well instructed in elementary education. These have given satisfaction
to those best qualified to judge, and to the public in general, in two
public examinations which have taken place. The number of children now
in the school is 208. Two years ago, I formed a private school upon the
Lancasterian system. It contains at present forty children belonging to
the best families of this city, who pay for each child six dollars a
quarter. The master of this school is a young man of excellent talents,
and of good conduct. He attended the central school for a whole year,
in order to learn the system well, and to approve himself capable of
conducting a school upon these principles. He expected to be employed in
one of the schools which the magistrates were about to establish, but as
it was impossible for them to carry forward their purpose, owing to the
disturbances of the times, I advised him to establish a private school.
The young man had not means to do this, as he was the son of a poor
widow. The Society, however, gave him lessons, slates, and pencils, and
Mr. Noble gave him the wood to make the seats and desks. Thus provided,
he offered to instruct, under the auspices of the Society, and by my
direction,—elementary education, and also the principles of geometry,
trigonometry, and geography, and to hold a public examination of his
pupils every year. I am happy to inform you that the children are making
very great progress, owing to the steadiness and fidelity of the master,
and to the six well instructed monitors whom I sent him from the other
school, each of whom knows more than any of the masters of this place.

“I am sorry to inform you that the master of the central school died
about three weeks ago. In consequence of this misfortune, I have been
obliged to take the school into my own hands until another master be
appointed.

“I mentioned to you, in a former letter, that I had organized Mrs. Hyne’s
school in Buenos Aires on the Lancasterian system, with this peculiarity
in the arrangement, that the children are taught in English one day,
and in Spanish the other; as she has scholars who speak these languages
respectively, I sent her some of the lessons printed here for the use of
her school.”

The school here referred to is kept by an English lady, and was just
beginning when I left Buenos Aires. It was afterwards fully established
on your system as above mentioned. I have had frequent information
respecting the prosperity of this school, and am told that the youth of
that city show a great desire to study the English language, and are
making progress in it. Their parents have thus shown their desire for
the education of their children, in instructing them in our tongue, and
they have shown their liberality in sending them without scruple to be
educated by an English lady belonging to the Protestant church.

In the preceding review of the schools in Buenos Aires, there is much
to cheer the minds and hearts of those who interest themselves in the
welfare of their fellow-men, and who use their best exertions for
this end, in the way in which they can be most effectual, namely, in
the instruction of the young. To see the youthful flocks increasing
in numbers, and growing in the knowledge of the purest religion and
morality, by reading and imbibing the sacred oracles, is a sight truly
gratifying, and to hear of this will, I am sure, afford much satisfaction
to the Committee of the British and Foreign School Society. It will also,
I trust, lead you to renewed exertions on behalf of that country, and,
knowing your readiness to do so, I beg leave to suggest the propriety
of sending out a person possessing good talents, and well acquainted
with your system, that he may be employed in extending education through
the various provinces of these United States; and, in recommending this
measure, I repeat my conviction, that the gentleman now elected President
of these States, Don Bernardino Rivadavia, will take a pleasure in
seconding your views.

I now turn your attention to the provinces of Mendoza and San Juan,
as these form a part of the United Provinces of the Rio de la Plata.
In March 1822, I visited these places, and found a very great desire
existing there, in regard to education. Our excellent friend, Dr.
Gillies, was at that time (and still is) residing in Mendoza. He had
contributed much to create such a desire, and was very active in using
every means for satisfying it. It was through his very urgent request,
that I visited these places, I was much gratified with what I saw there,
as regards a growing spirit of knowledge and liberality. The governor
of Mendoza was very friendly to the establishment of Schools. A Society
for promoting them was established a few days after my arrival, and a
petition was presented to the Governor, that a small printing press,
belonging to the town, might be placed at their disposal, that they might
print lessons for the schools, and might otherwise gain a little for
promoting their objects. This request was immediately acceded to, and the
press and the types were transferred accordingly. A newspaper has been
printed at this press for some time, and it has greatly contributed to
enlighten that quarter. A girls’ school was begun whilst I was there,
and measures were taken for establishing schools for boys, which were
afterwards carried into effect. After these favourable circumstances
had been some time in operation, a storm overtook our worthy friends.
They were like to be overwhelmed by a spirit of fanaticism, which had
raised itself against the promoters of education and reform, by those of
a contrary mind. The enemies of righteousness prevailed for some time,
but at length they stumbled and fell, and truth and improvement again
appeared, and prevailed, and now reign in triumph. Those individuals who
had combined together to benefit their country, and whose benevolent
arrangements were thus for some time impeded; these very individuals are
now the chief persons in the government, and are thus enabled to carry
their measures into effect.

In the Province of San Juan I found many enlightened individuals who were
warm friends of education. There were, no doubt, many of other feelings
and wishes. A printed circular was sent to the different persons of
note in that place by the Governor, inviting them to a meeting in his
own house, for discussing the subject of establishing schools on your
system. A good many attended, and some were for the measure, and some
against it. The Governor was a warm friend to the object, and the meeting
broke up by his signifying, that it was the intention of the government
to use its best endeavours to forward this object. I left some Scripture
lessons for the schools in that place, as I had done in Mendoza, the
price of which, together with the expenses of my journey there, were paid
by the Governors of these two places.

Before I leave San Juan, I wish to notice the meritorious conduct of Don
Salvador Carril. In the meeting referred to, he was one of the principal
defenders of our objects, and strongly urged the adoption of the proposed
plan. Some time after, this gentleman was appointed Governor in that
province. When holding that situation, he wished to use all his influence
for the establishment of religious liberty in his native province. I have
great pleasure in stating that in this _he completely succeeded._ He has
thus had the honour of leading the way in this important matter, and of
making his own province _the first part of South America, to declare for
Religious Liberty_. The date of this _era_, for such it may be called to
this new continent, is the sixth of June, 1825. The province of Buenos
Aires has adopted the same wise and liberal policy, but the first honour
is due to San Juan, and to its Governor Carril.[8] I must not omit to
mention here, Mr. Rawson from the United States, and who has long
resided in San Juan. His name is connected with every measure for the
improvement of that country.

In regard to the other provinces of the Rio de la Plata, I can say very
little, but I believe education is in a very low state in all of them.
The names of these provinces are, Santa Fé, Entre Rios, Corientes,
Paraguay, Salta, Tucuman, and Córdova. It is, however, very probable,
from the general spirit diffused through these countries, that plans
for the improvement and extension of education would be very favourably
received, particularly under the recommendation and fostering care of the
President, Don Bernardino Rivadavia.

I omitted to mention before stretching across the Pampas, another
Lancasterian School and Society. This School and Society are situated
about 500 miles to the South of the City of Buenos Aires, at the
mouth of the Rio Negro, where there is a small fort and town. Colonel
Oyüela, who was appointed Governor of that quarter some months before
my leaving the eastern side of the continent, attended our central
school to get acquainted with our system, and on going to the place
of his appointment, he carried with him a supply of lessons for the
commencement of a school. I afterwards learned, that he had endeavoured
to interest the inhabitants of that place in the education of their
children, and that he had succeeded in establishing a school, and
in forming a small society for its support. To this small society,
contributions were made by the inhabitants of such things as they had,
and these were turned into money, and kept the school going forward. The
conduct of Colonel Oyüela in this matter is truly praiseworthy, as it
springs from a sincere desire to promote education, and to benefit those
over whom he is placed. If all governors, _far and near_, were to act in
the same manner, we should soon see ignorance turned into knowledge all
the world over.

The British System was begun in Chile, in July 1821. The Director, Don
Bernardo O’Higgins, manifested a sincere desire to extend education
throughout the country over which he was placed, and was ready to listen
to any improvements in the manner of communicating knowledge, which might
be brought before him. The principal Secretary of State, Don Rafael
Echevarria, was also much interested in the subject. Three schools
were established in Santiago, the capital, one in Valparaiso, and one
in Coquimbo. Some months before I left Chile, Mr. Eaton arrived there,
having been sent from London, by Mr. Irisarri, to promote education
on the Lancasterian plan. The government intended to send Mr. Eaton
to Conception, in the south of Chile, to establish schools in that
province, but on representing to the director, that it would be better to
concentrate our labours in the capital, and from thence to send qualified
masters to the various provinces, it was acceded to that Mr. Eaton should
remain in Santiago. Our labours were continued there together until
I received an invitation from General San Martin to go to Peru. Upon
considering fully the importance of this invitation, as affording an
opportunity for extending the blessings of education, in that interesting
country, I thought it advisable to accept of it, considering that Mr.
Eaton would remain in Chile, and that thus what had been begun there,
would be maintained, and that by degrees, through his labours, the
system would be generally extended in that quarter. These expectations,
however, were not realized, as Mr. Eaton, in a few months after I went
to Peru, fell sick, and was obliged to return to England. In consequence
of this misfortune, the cause in Chile began to decline, and I believe,
at the present moment, the schools formerly established are in a very
low state, if not given up altogether. It is much to be regretted, that
things should remain in this state in Chile, and that the great work of
education should be retarded there, whilst it is making progress in other
quarters. During my stay in Peru, I had some notices of how things were
going on, and where they might probably end, unless I should accede to
their invitation to return there, or at all events send a well qualified
master to sustain the system. I could not go myself to Chile, although
I had a great desire to go, because my leaving Peru at that time, might
have occasioned a retrogression similar to what had taken place in Chile.
In consequence of this, I looked out for a well instructed master to
go there. Before I succeeded in obtaining one, the Spanish army took
possession of Lima, and General Rodil, who commanded the fortresses of
Callao, refused to allow the master to go when I called on him to obtain
a passport.

From the representatives of the Chilian government, now in London, I have
learned that there is a great regret at the disappointment met with in
regard to the schools; and that there exists a sincere desire to remedy
the evil as much as possible, and without delay. I mention this to the
Committee agreeable to your request that I should point out the best
means for forwarding education in South America. I would suggest the
propriety of seeking out a well qualified person to go to Chile, and if
the one selected is well fitted for conducting education, I have no doubt
of his obtaining a favourable reception, and of his being the means of
greatly benefiting that country. For the encouragement of such a one, I
would say, that Chile enjoys a delightful climate, and its inhabitants
are, I think, more moral in general than in any other part of South
America where I have been.

The persons you might correspond with in Chile upon this subject,
are the present Director, General Freire, Don Rafael Echevarria, Don
Henrique Camillo, and Don Manuel Salas. General Freire was Governor of
Conception when I resided in Chile; but, on a visit he paid to Santiago
when I was there, I had an interview with him, in which he manifested
his satisfaction at the progress of our schools on your system, and
his readiness to encourage the introduction of the same plan in the
province of Conception, when we should be able to send a master there.
I have, indeed, no doubt of his hearty co-operation with any measures
which the Society may adopt on behalf of Chile. The other three person
mentioned will lend all their aid in this good work. Mr. Echevarria
was First Secretary of State at the time I was there, and encouraged
education on this system by sending his own son to our central school,
and by a frequent attendance himself in the afternoons when his public
business was over. Mr. Camillo was, and I believe is, contributing
to the enlightening of his countrymen respecting education and other
improvements by publishing a periodical work which had these things for
its sole object. Don Manuel Salas is already known to you by my letters
from Chile. He is a man up in years, and his only desire is to benefit
his countrymen in every way he can, and he looks upon education as the
most effectual means of doing permanent good.

I have only further to mention respecting Chile, that Mr. Egaña, the
present envoy from that government now in London, will be ready to
give the Committee any information or assistance in his power to the
furtherance of this object.

My arrival in Peru, in the end of June 1822, and the favourable
circumstances in the establishment of schools there, is detailed in my
letters written about that period. Some time after these prosperous days,
the war in that country greatly hindered the progress of education.
We had often been scourged by this foe before, particularly in Buenos
Aires, but the occurrences in Peru were to me, at least, new. Our former
wars were among ourselves, and whatever party gained the ascendancy the
schools went on unmolested, or nearly so; but in Lima we came in contact
with the Spaniards, the well known encouragers of ignorance, at least so
far as South America is concerned. Twice was Lima taken possession of
by the Spanish armies during my residence there. On the first occasion
I left the city along with some thousands, who fled at that unhappy
time. The schools suffered an interruption of three months by the first
visit of the Spanish troops. On the second occasion, to prevent a like
interruption, I remained in the city, and the schools went on, though not
so prosperously as we could have wished. The protection we enjoyed at
this time was owing, I believe, in a good measure, to the general feeling
in the place in favour, of education. After remaining six months under
the Spanish dominion, in that city, and finding it impossible to advance,
I left that place on my way northward, and finally came to England.
Of the result of this journey you are already acquainted, through the
publications of the Bible Society.

The Central School established in the College of the Dominican Friars
in Lima, contained, on the entrance of the Spanish army, 230 children,
and was going on well; there was another school on the same plan which
had 80 scholars in it. In both these schools printed sheets of extracts
from the Scriptures were used for lessons, the same as in Buenos Aires
and Chile. But in addition to this, in Lima the New Testament entire,
printed by the British and Foreign Bible Society in London, was used as
our principal school-book. In this precious volume the children in the
higher classes read, and were questioned as to its contents. The same
volume was carried home by the children, and read by them there, and
portions of it also were committed to memory. These portions were recited
in school, and premiums were awarded according to the accuracy of the
recitation, and the clearness of the views which the children gave in
their own language, of what they had recited. Besides the sheet lessons,
the Scripture extracts were printed and used in the form of little books.
Requests at times came from the parents to have a copy of these to read,
which requests were complied with, and thus the word of God became more
known, and I trust more revered and obeyed.

I am not sure whether I mentioned to you or not, on former occasions,
_the name_ of an esteemed friend and an able coadjutor in the work of
education. It would in me be a dereliction of duty to pass over in
silence the name and the character of this individual. The gentleman I
speak of is Don José Francisco Navarrete, a clergyman in Lima. After
an acquaintance with him for about two years, and experiencing during
the half of that time his able co-operation, I beg leave to recommend
him to the attention of the Society, in reference to the furtherance of
education in Peru. I have had three letters from him since my return to
England, and am happy to find that he continues his exertions unabated in
promoting the instruction of youth, and that the schools left under his
charge are doing well. He informs me that a school has been established
in Huánuco, and that it is conducted by a native of that place, who
attended our school in Lima several months when I was there. Huánuco
is a very happy station for a school. It is situated in an interesting
country, and is the key to the large uncivilized population which inhabit
the banks of the Huallága, Ucayáli, and Amazon. From Huánuco as a centre
I am persuaded much may be done on behalf of these poor creatures,
who, though living in one of the richest portions of the world, wander
about almost naked, half fed, and in complete ignorance of the arts and
comforts of life; and what is still more to be regretted, no cheering
ray breaks in upon them of a world to come, and of the everlasting
felicity to be enjoyed there through our Lord Jesus Christ. Let us hope,
and let us pray for it, that education may soon begin among them, that
the Holy Scriptures may be put into their hands, and that the Spirit
of God may descend upon these poor Gentiles, as it did on us in former
days, that their sins may be washed away, and that they may enjoy an
inheritance among all them that are sanctified.

Another favourable circumstance has taken place since my leaving Peru,
in regard to the quarter I am now speaking of. In Ocopa, not far distant
from Huánuco there has existed for many years a College of Friars, most
of whom were natives of Spain. This College has been made to change its
object, and instead of being as formerly a nursery of Friars, it has
become a seminary for the education of youth on the British System, and
its ample funds are now applied to this object. This happy change has
been effected entirely through General Bolívar. After mentioning this
circumstance, as bearing on the character of Bolívar, it might be thought
unnecessary to say more respecting him, as the instance now mentioned
very plainly indicates his desire to benefit South America, not by his
military exertions only, but also by the gentler, more effectual means
of early instruction. I must however add two circumstances more, in
proof of Bolívar’s deep interest and active exertions in the cause of
education. Some months subsequent to the decree referred to for changing
the object of the College of Ocopa, he issued a decree for establishing
a Central School on the Lancasterian System, in the capital city of each
province throughout Peru, and from which Central Schools, masters are to
be sent into all the towns and hamlets of the respective provinces. This
is a most effectual measure for speedily enlightening all the inhabitants
of that country. The other circumstance I have to mention in regard to
Bolívar is a decree he issued about a year ago for sending two young
men from every province in Peru to England, to receive here, at the
expense of the Government, the best education that can be obtained. After
finishing their studies in this country, these young men are to return
to their native land, and to fill important stations in the great work
of general illumination. I am sure the hearts of the Committee are by
this time warmly attached to this useful individual, whom God Almighty
has raised up to be so great a blessing to his country, in breaking
their chains of oppression and of ignorance. Ten of the young men sent
by Bolívar have arrived in this country, and are now pursuing their
studies in the neighbourhood of London. One of these was a monitor in our
central school in Lima. The rest of the young men are expected to arrive
here soon. I am happy in being thus able to confirm, by unexceptionable
instances, the opinion I formerly gave you of this great man, after
enjoying the pleasure of an interview with him, and conversing upon these
subjects.—To these things must be added the appropriation of 20,000
dollars for promoting schools in Caraccas through Mr. Lancaster.

In the lustre of Bolívar, I had nearly forgotten something more I had to
say of our friend Navarrete, a man who only needs the station of Bolívar
to do all that he does. In one of the letters I lately received from
him, he says, he has obtained from the Government the grant of part of a
nunnery for establishing a girls’ school. This nunnery is close beside
the college where the boys’ central school is. This school, about to
be established, is to be the model and the central establishment for
the education of the female sex, a branch of education very much wanted
in that country. May God speed the labours of our dear friend in this
matter, and may mothers, and daughters, and sisters, embalm his memory
for ages to come!

I believe the Committee is now aware that I have given up any intention
of returning to Peru, and that I have fixed on another spot of South
America, where I intend to spend my remaining days. I would beg leave,
therefore, to solicit the attention of the Committee to Peru, and would
suggest the propriety of their sending out a fit person to that place, to
be actively employed in the establishment of schools. I have no doubt of
such an individual meeting with a favourable reception, and of his being
immediately employed by the Government in this work.

Before leaving Peru, I wish to notice one of the articles of the
constitution of that state, as it has an important bearing upon the cause
of education. The article in question states, that the elective franchise
is open to all, but with the express preliminary qualification, that
the voter be able to read and to write. It is, however, added that in
consequence of the ignorance in which the Spaniards have kept the people
in general, this pre-requisite shall not be required until the year 1840.
The measures which the Government is pursuing for promoting general
education, bid fair, I think, to qualify all by the given time, in the
manner referred to.[9]

In regard to education in Colombia, I have hitherto said but little, and
that little is contained in a letter to you from Quito, in November 1824.
In that communication, I mentioned a plan for establishing a seminary
for the education of the female sex in that city. The difficulties
of converting a monastery into such a seminary are considerable, and
although I am pretty confident of the ultimate success of that measure,
I cannot speak definitely as to its progress. The last notice I had
upon the subject, was in a letter from one of the members of Congress,
in which he says, that the question was to be forthwith discussed in
Congress. I hope no long time will elapse before we have the gratifying
intelligence of the complete success of this measure, and, in expectation
of this, I suggest the propriety of having a well qualified person
ready to occupy this station. I am thus particular upon this point, as
I conceive the carrying into effect the proposed plan, will have a most
beneficial tendency on the welfare of that large city (the largest in
Colombia), and on that of the populous and interesting district in which
it is situated.

In passing along from Quito to Bogotá, I found three schools established
on the British or Monitorian System; one was in Yahuará, and the other
two were in Popayan; one of the latter was for boys, and the other for
girls. The establishment of these schools, in the provincial parts of
Colombia, is the result of a general plan of education upon this system
in connection with a central school established some time ago in Bogotá,
the capital. On arriving at that city, I visited this model school, and
hoped to meet there the director of the establishment, to converse with
him in regard to the number and efficiency of the various provincial
schools. I was however disappointed of seeing him, as he was then
actually engaged on a tour through some of the provinces to promote the
formation of new schools. I cannot, therefore, state how many schools
were then in operation, but I have good reason to think the existing
number is calculated to encourage the friends of education, and that it
goes on increasing.

I received from Mr. Restrepo, the minister of the interior, a set of
the lessons used in the schools. One regrets to find the Scriptures not
there, nor any extracts from a volume so much calculated to benefit
us, in youth and in age, in time and in eternity. With this important
exception, the lessons are good, and every way superior to the trash
formerly used in the schools of South America. One part of the lessons
is worthy of notice. The constitution of the country is divided into
portions and sections, and is read in the schools. By this means
the children get acquainted in early life with the real nature and
circumstances of their native land, and thus become better citizens, and
more useful to each other. This plan is worthy of imitation in other
quarters. It is to be hoped that ere long this judicious plan, which has
been adopted for imbuing the early mind with a knowledge of the statutes
of their country, will be adopted also with regard to the statutes of God
unfolded in the Holy Scriptures.

The next part of what was formerly called Spanish America is Guatemala.
This is properly neither in North nor South America, and it has, in
consequence, been denominated Central America. Not having visited that
quarter, all I have to say of it in regard to education is but little,
and that is, of course, from the information of others, I understand
several schools have been established in the capital and elsewhere, but
none of these are on the monitorian plan. In conversing with Mr. Zebadúa
the envoy of that government in London, and with Mr. Herrera, a gentleman
from that country who feels a great interest in education, I have learned
that they are very desirous of obtaining a person thoroughly versed in
this system, in order to establish a central and other schools in that
republic. I hope the Committee will have this quarter in view as well as
the others recommended above, when properly qualified teachers can be
obtained.

The only other part that remains to be noticed is Mexico; and for
information respecting the state and prospects of education there,
I beg leave to refer you to the interesting communication of our
excellent friend, Don Vicente de Rocafuerte, Chargé d’Affaires from that
government.[10]

In reviewing the state and progress of education in South America, there
is undoubtedly much that is calculated to gratify and to cheer the hearts
of those who delight in the progress of knowledge, and in the welfare
of man. Besides the pleasure that arises from seeing what has actually
been done in the few years in which these new states have enjoyed the
boon of liberty,—there is yet more to cheer us in contemplating the
general feeling which pervades the country upon the important subject
of education. During my seven years’ residence in that country, I have
had intercourse with all classes of society there, and, through repeated
conversations and otherwise, have come, I think, to understand what are
the actual feelings and desires of the people upon this point. _I have
no hesitation in saying, that the public voice is decidedly in favour
of UNIVERSAL EDUCATION_. I never heard, even once, what is still to be
heard elsewhere, “that the poor should not be taught.” The very opposite
feeling most undoubtedly exists and prevails among the clergy and the
laity, the governors and the governed. On a survey, therefore, of the
whole scene, and in looking into futurity, the brightest views may, I
think, be entertained as to the progress and best interests of man in
that large and interesting continent; and, from this view of things, I am
sure none will derive more real gratification than the Committee of the
British and Foreign School Society.

    _Report of Mr. Rocafuerte, Chargé d’Affaires in England
    from the Government of Mexico, delivered in a Speech at the
    Twenty-first Annual Meeting of the British and Foreign School
    Society, May 15th, 1826._

    The independence of South America is the consequence of that
    growing spirit of modern civilization which, having crossed
    the Atlantic Ocean on the wings of trade, has penetrated into
    those remote countries, and liberated them from the Spanish
    yoke. What more gratifying picture can there be for a true and
    liberal Christian, than that which the new world now presents,
    overturning a bad system, and establishing a good one, without
    being attended with scenes of violence and cruelties. It may
    truly be said that the characteristic feature of the Mexican
    revolution is that spirit of moderation and generosity which
    the maxims of the Gospel recommend, and which are the best
    means for establishing true liberty. Our revolution, in its
    object, its means, and end, is very different from that of
    France: among us, it is not an overthrow of all principles; it
    is a natural tendency to create a new order; it is a general
    combination to promote the happiness of a vast continent;
    it is a necessary transition from darkness to light, from
    superstition to christian morality. From the ruins of Greece
    and Italy, sprung some rays of light, which, illuminating
    the darkness of the middle age, prepared the epoch of the
    discovery of the printing-press, the mariner’s compass, and
    the new world. From that time, the constant progress of the
    arts and sciences has converted knowledge into power, and
    nations have been more or less opulent and happy in the ratio
    of their scientific attainments, of their industry, and above
    all, of their moral and religious principles, which form the
    solid basis of true freedom. To these effects of liberty,
    England owes her greatness, her happiness, and that very first
    rank which she holds in the catalogue of civilized nations.
    Spain, that beautiful country, worthy of a better fate, has
    been ruined by her ignorance and monkish superstition; she
    has only one advantage over the Turkish nation, and that is,
    that she lives under the glorious standard of the cross; and
    this standard, I hope, will soon lead the valiant and heroic
    Greeks to victory, and thus enable them at length to spread
    Christianity over the land of their tyrants.

    Those lessons shall not be lost in South America. We are
    convinced that the foundation of our future and permanent
    prosperity rests on the moral improvements of the lower classes
    of society. It is not enough for a man to know how to read and
    write, and gain a livelihood; he must have religious habits,
    must know exactly his duties towards God and towards society;
    and no institution is so well calculated for obtaining those
    great objects as the British and Foreign School Society. What
    an admirable undertaking it is, to bestow the blessing of
    scriptural knowledge on all mankind, to unite all the nations
    of the globe, by the brotherly ties of science and religion.
    Ye noble promoters of this institution! be assured you have
    many warm friends in South America. The general desire with us
    of all true and enlightened patriots, is for education; the
    general cry all over our continent is, _give us education_.
    This is the reason that the Lancasterian System has been
    immediately adopted in almost every part of South America.

    Mr. Lancaster is now living at Caraccas, and promoting public
    instruction there.

    In Mexico, the first Lancasterian School was opened on the
    22nd of August, 1822; and by one of those singular occurrences
    in revolutions, the halls of the Inquisition, so inimical to
    this Institution, were converted into a public school, into
    a nursery of free men, into a true temple of reason. Three
    hundred children are taught to read in this school according to
    this new system of education, a system which will lead to the
    moral perfection of the world, as the mariner’s compass led to
    the geographical perfection of the globe. This first school was
    called _Escuela del Sol_.

    Some time afterwards the Government granted to the Lancasterian
    Association of Mexico the large and beautiful convent of
    Bethlehem, and a second school was formed there. This
    establishment is divided into three departments, and directed
    by two professors well acquainted with the system; one of them
    is a Frenchman, who went purposely for that object from Paris
    to Mexico.

    The first department is calculated for six hundred and sixty
    children; they learn to read, write, and _cypher_; they are
    also instructed in the political and religious catechism,
    orthography, arithmetic, and Spanish grammar. The parents of
    the scholars who can pay, give a dollar a month, which is about
    two pounds ten shillings a year; the children of the poor pay
    nothing.

    The second department will contain four hundred scholars, who
    pay two dollars per month, or nearly five pounds a year. It
    is a model or central school for forming teachers and good
    professors; and these are afterwards to be sent into the
    different provinces, in order to fulfil the desire of our
    Government, which is, to place in every village throughout
    Mexico a Lancasterian school, a printing-press, and a chapel.

    The third department will contain three hundred scholars; and
    these pay three dollars a month, or seven pounds a year. The
    object intended in this department is, to teach Latin, French,
    geography, and drawing, on the principles of the Lancasterian
    system. This trial has been made, but I am not sure whether it
    has answered or not.

    In 1823, there were introduced into the Lancasterian school
    of Mexico, the lessons used in your school in London, taken
    from the Bible, without note or comment. Some old priests
    opposed the introduction of these, stating that it was
    prohibited to read extracts from the Bible without notes. The
    Secretary of the Lancasterian Association, Mr. Gandéra, a
    very enlightened clergyman, and distinguished for his virtue
    and zeal in the cause of religion, supported the opposite
    opinion, and succeeded in establishing in the school the use
    of these extracts. The consequence is, that our children are
    acquiring a taste for the perusal of the Scriptures, and they
    are hence learning to be virtuous, charitable, tolerant, and
    free. This moral education will promote the cause of religious
    toleration, and will effect that regeneration which our new
    political system requires. We cannot remain as we are; we must
    go forward; and, as said in Parliament by Mr. Canning, (whose
    name is dear to all our hearts in South America,) “we must go
    forward, and keep pace with the growing spirit of the times,
    and the great change that has been wrought in the opinions
    of the world.” This great change in the general opinion is,
    that nations can only be happy under the banners of liberal
    sentiments and true morality; that, in short, the combination
    of political and religious freedom is as necessary for the
    moral happiness of mankind, as that combination of the two
    gasses, forming the atmospheric air which we breathe, is to
    our physical existence. This vast plan of human improvement
    is the great object of your noble Institution, an Institution
    which truly deserves the gratitude of the world, and the most
    cordial support of all who are influenced _by the love of their
    country, and the principles of Christianity_.

[7] Though this letter was not written in South America, as all the
preceding were, yet its evident bearing upon the subject in hand entitle
it, perhaps, to the place it occupies.

[8] At page 32, it is stated that religious liberty was publicly
acknowledged in Peru, under San Martin. This acknowledgement, in Peru,
of this sound principle of policy and of justice, certainly preceded the
one here referred to in San Juan. But the circumstances were different.
In Peru it was the single act of General San Martin, as Protector,
or Dictator of Peru, and the people of the country had no share in
it, whereas in San Juan, the declaration of Religious Liberty was a
legislative act.

[9] This notice, I find, is mentioned in a preceding letter, yet I leave
it here also, as I think the subject is not unworthy of a repetition.

[10] This communication, bearing upon the subject of education in
Spanish America, will be added at the close of this letter. When this
communication is considered as the production of a native of that
country, a gentleman intimately acquainted with its concerns, and
actually holding a high official situation under the Government of the
most populous of these new states, it may tend to confirm the favourable
accounts from that quarter of the world contained in the preceding
letters.

The enlightened and liberal mind of Mr. Rocafuerte, and his truly zealous
endeavours to raise his country high in political wisdom, in literature,
in morality, and in pure religion, are truly praiseworthy.


FINIS.


    DENNETT,
    Leather Lane, London.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 67526 ***
